Page 1 of 21 
  Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products  
Professor H. N. Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture 59  
FSSAI Regulations & FSMS Guidelines for Fruits, Vegetables, Spi ces and Plantation 
Crops  
 
This lecture discussed various a spects of FSSAI regulations and  FSMS guidelines for fruits, 
vegetables, spices and plantation crops.  
 
The concepts covered in this lecture are FSSAI regulations and product standards i.e. major 
products from fruits and vegeta bles, spices, etc. Other than th at, spice adulteration, food safety 
management system and HACCP implementation and CCPs were discus sed.  
Page 2 of 21 
  
Criteria for defining food safety standards in FSSAI 
Food Safety and Standard Authority of India (FSSAI) has been co nstituted has the authority to 
decide various rules, regulations , quality standards, safety st andards, etc. for all food products 
and the FSSAI guidelines or regulations are mandatory in nature . So, every food business 
operator or food manufacturer has to follow the FSSAI guideline s. FSSAI has certain norms for 
defining the safety and quality standards. There are various ki nds of descriptions of each quality 
parameters, which are taken int o consideration in  the FSSAI reg ulations.  
The criteria for the safety standards or quality standards incl ude detailed description for each 
quality parameter of the same type of products. The product was  described for having a detailed 
know-how for food processors. The quality factors which describ es the quality related to 
packing, sensory, nutritional, etc. are mentioned detail relate d to the product. The labeling 
includes tag, brand, mark, pictorial or other descriptive matte rs of the products relating to 
packaging and its labeling and then finally, limitations of qua lity attributes values, this includes 
the range of the quality attribut e values for the products and these are decided on the basis of a 
very thorough scientific consid erations and discussions by the committees.   
Thermally processed vegetables and fruits 
In the FSSAI guidelines, particul arly if we talk about fruits a nd vegetable products, they have 
come up with certain standards for various processed fruits and  vegetable products. Some 
examples of thermally processed vegetables and fruits and their  criteria’s are, in canned 
tomatoes, the pH should be greater than 4.5. The calcium chlori de is being used as a firming 
agent with ion concentration less than 0.045% and sodium chlori de less than 3% was used in 
packaging.   
 
Page 3 of 21 
  
Similarly, in tomato juice, its TSS should be less than 0.05% e xclusive of salt. Sodium chloride 
should be less than 3% by weight and sugar content less than 42 %, titratable acidity less than 
10%, volatile acidity l ess than 0.4%, and pH should be less tha n 4.5.   
In the case of vegetable soups, they can be fermented or unferm ented. The TSS should be less 
than 5% except for tomato soup where it is less than 7%. In fru it beverages, the TSS should be 
less than 10%. The fruit juice content, in the case of lime and  lemon should be less than 5% and 
for other fruits, it s hould be less than 10%. 
 
Thermally processed fruit juices 
In the table shown below, different juices, their minimum TSS c ontent, and maximum acidity. 
For apple juice, the minimum T SS is 10% and maximum acidity sho uld be 3.5% as malic acid. 
In orange juice, it should contain 10% TSS and 3.5 % acidity bo th for freshly expressed or 
reconstituted from concentrate.  Similarly, in the lemon juice T SS should be 6% minimum and 
acidity is 4 minimum. The grape juice whether it is freshly exp ressed or reconstituted from 
Page 4 of 21 
 concentrate, it should have minimum TSS of 15% and the maximum acidity expressed in citric 
acid of 3.5. In general, the pH or acidity should be around 3.5 % maximum and the TSS may be 
10% minimum except lemon or lime.   
 
Thermally processed fruit nectars 
The table shown has variety of f ruit nectars, their minimum TSS  and fruit juice content, as well 
as maximum acidity. The orange n ectar or pineapple nectar conta ins minimum 40% fruit juice. 
Others fruit nectars have minimum 20% fruit juice content. The TSS and acidity is same for all 
the nectar i.e. TSS of 15% and a cidity of 1.5% expressed as cit ric acid.  
For mango pulp, TSS changes with maturity or sweetening as swee tened mango pulp has 
minimum 15% TSS whereas unsweetened mango pulp has 12%. Acidity  for sweetened mango 
pulp is more than or equal to 0.3%. For other pulps, TSS should  not be more than 6% and acidity 
0.3%.  
 
Page 5 of 21 
 Thermally processed concentrated fruit/vegetable juice pulp/pur ee 
For thermally processed tomato puree and paste, unfermented pro duct which is capable of 
fermentation obtained by concentrating the juice of the sound r ipe tomato or to the desired 
concentration is required. It may contain salt and other ingred ients suitable to the products. The 
tomato puree and paste must have TSS content less than 9% and 2 5% respectively. In soup 
powder, the moisture content and TSS should be not less than 5% . The moisture content of fruit 
bar or toffee should not be more than 20% with minimum TSS of 7 5% and fruit content of 25%. 
In fruit/vegetable flakes, the moisture content should not be m ore than 20%.  The acid insoluble 
should be more than 0.5% and sta rch content should be more than  25%. 
 
Similarly, squashes, crushes, fruit syrups, fruit sharbat and b arley etc. have minimum 25% of 
fruit juice puree in the final product. The TSS differs based o n product such as squash (40%), 
crush (55%), fruit syrup (65%), cordial and water (30%). The ac idity is 3.5% for all except 
water which has 2.5%.  
 
Page 6 of 21 
 In the case of culinary paste fruits and vegetable sauces other  than tomato sauce, the TSS and 
acidity is given in the table. For example, chili sauce, the TS S should not be less than 8% and 
acidity should not be less than 1% . In ginger paste, minimum TS S is 3% and acidity is 1%.   
For carbonated fruit beverages, the product shall have the colo r, taste and flavor characteristics 
of the product and the product shall be free from any extraneou s matter. In carbonated fruit 
drinks, the quantity of fruit juices is below 10% but not less than 5%. So, the total soluble solid 
would be more than 10%. Fruit content in the lime or lime juice  should be more than 5% and 
fruit content in other fruit ju ices should be more than 10%.  
 
Dehydrated vegetables 
The dehydrated vegetable means the product prepared from edible  portion of suitable variety 
of sound vegetables. It may be whole, sliced, quarters, flaked,  kibbled, granules or powdered. 
The finished product shall have uniform color and shall be free  from discoloration due to 
scorching or enzymatic reactions. The green leafy vegetables, c abbage, okra, garlic etc. in the 
dehydrated form must contain moisture about 5 to 8%. The sulfur  dioxide which is used in these 
fruit or vegetable for preservation should not be higher than 2 000 ppm where peroxide test for 
each dehydrated vegetable must be negative for further acceptan ce.  
Fruit and vegetable chutney 
The fruits and vegetable chutney prepared must have TSS greater  than 50% and 25% 
respectively. The fruits and vegetable content in the chutney s hould be higher than 40%. The 
pH and the total ash content of fruits and vegetables chutney s hould not be more than 4.6 and 
5% respectively. Similar qualit y limits are made for mango chut ney as well.    
 
Page 7 of 21 
  
 
Guidelines on spices 
The major guidelines on spices as per the International Organiz ation for Standardization (ISO). 
There are 109 varieties of spi ces listed in ISO and out of whic h 75 varieties are produced in 
India. The guidelines on spices are made mainly to reduce the f ood-borne illnesses that have 
increased in the past few years. Although many of these spices do contain that antibacterial 
agents but still molds etc. grows on them. So, all material tha t are allergens should be labeled 
with a tag that states “Allergen” and it should be kept separat ely. The label can be made bold 
and bright in color for quick id entification. The common allerg ens in the spices are the cereals 
containing gluten, i.e. wheat,  rye, barley, oats, spelt or the ir hybridized strains and products of 
these; products of these pea nut, tree nut and nut products, ses ame, celery and mustard etc.   
Page 8 of 21 
  
FSSAI limits for the dried whole spices 
As per the FSSA guidelines for dried whole spices, various spic es contain extraneous matter 
which needs to be reduced to less than 2 or even 1%. Moisture, total ash, volatile oil and insect 
damaged matter have been specified under the guidelines for var ious spices, dehydrated spices. 
For example chili or cardamom (elaichi) should not contain extr aneous matter more than 1%. 
Moisture content should be less than or equal to 13%, total ash  less than 9.5%, volatile oil more 
than 3.5% and insect damaged ma tter less than 1%. Similarly, in  the case of cumin seed (safed 
jira), extraneous ma tter should be less than 3%, moisture less than 10%, total ash less than 9.5%, 
volatile oil greater than 1.5% and insect damaged matter less t han 1%. So, various guidelines 
f o r  d i f f e r e n t  s p i c e s ,  d r i e d  s p i c e s ,  t h e s e  l i m i t s  a r e  p r e s c r i b e d . One may refer the FSSAI 
guidelines available on their w ebsite and other various literat ures category.   
 
Adulteration in spices 
In the case of spices, adulteration is common. In mustard seeds , argemone seeds are added.  
Page 9 of 21 
 Chili powder has many adulterants such as brick powder, salt po wder or talc, artificial colors 
etc. Starch powder, sawdust are added in ground spices. Cinnamo n can be adulterated with 
cassia. Cloves can be mixed with exhausted cloves. There are va rious tests to conduct or check 
the adulterants present in spices. Some common precautions that  the consumer can take are 
check the FSSAI logo and license n umber on the label of the pac kage of the organic spices, do 
not buy powder the spices sold loose, do not buys spices with e xtra sign and bright color, do 
not buy any spices with unpleasan t odors or do  not buy the pack aged spices where the package 
is damaged. There are provisions i n the FSSAI guidelines and st andards for their punishment.   
 
Permissible composition of  different kinds of sugar 
The permissible composition of different kinds of sugar for use  in different products in the fruits 
and vegetable processi ng may be khandsari s ugar, which is origi nated from sugarcane juice by 
the open pan process; jaggery o r gur, which is the product obta ined by boiling or  processing of 
the juice pressed out  of sugarcane; and bura sugar is the very fine grain size products made out 
of any kind of sugar. FSSAI has formulated guidelines for diffe rent kinds of sugar which are 
shown in table. For example, jaggery or gur should not have moi sture content more than 7% 
with 70% or more sucrose and less than 2% extraneous matter. To tal ash should be less than or 
equal to 6% and ash insoluble in HCl acid should be equal to or  less than 0.5%. Similarly, each 
sugar type has diffe rent guidelines.  
Page 10 of 21 
  
Permissible composition of  different tea products 
Similarly, the different permissi ble composition for different tea products by FSSAI is shown. 
Kangra tea, the tea derived from leaves, buds and tender stems of the Camellia  tea grown in  
Kangra and Mandi valleys of Himach a l  P r a d e s h  w h e r e a s  t h e  t e a  o t her than the Kangra is 
obtained from the leaves, buds and tender stems of plants of th e Camellia  sinensis . Green tea 
is the product derived solely by notably enzyme inactivation, r olling, drying, from the leaves, 
buds and tender stems of the species Camellia sinensis . So, the various contents standard like 
total ash (% m/m) in general should be in the range of 4 to 8%.  In the Kangra tea, it is 
recommended 4.5 to 9%. Water soluble ash (% of total ash) or ac id insoluble ash (% m/m) or 
even crude fiber (% m/m), iron filings (% mg/kg) etc. are presc ribed standards for these asset 
and some of these values are  given here in this table.  
 
Permissible composition of d ifferent coffee products 
Similarly, some permissible components or guidelines or standar ds for the different coffee 
Page 11 of 21 
 products and in the coffee product as per the FSSAI guidelines is shown in the given table. 
Chicory powder is permitted to be mixed. Chicory means the roas ted chicory powder which is 
obtained by roasting and grinding of the cleaned and dried root s of Cichorium intybus  Lin. The 
moisture content, total ash, water soluble ash, alkali soluble ash, aqueous extracts, and caffeine 
content are standardized for co ffee. For example caffeine shoul d be less than or equal to 1% in 
the green raw or unroasted coffee. The moisture in the all type s  o f  c o f f e e  s h o u l d  b e  i n  
approximately less than 4 or 5%. Total ash should be less than or equal to 12% in the case of 
soluble coffee powder or decaffeinated soluble coffee powder an d it should be less than or equal 
to 7.5 percent in coffee-chicory mixture or less than or equal to 10% in instant coffee-chicory 
mixture.  
 
Permissible composition of d ifferent kind of chocolates 
The permitted vegetable fats in the chocolates are mahua oil, g urgi kokum, savatore, mango 
kernel, oil from palms etc. The standards for the vegetable fat s to be mixed in the chocolates 
should be that the vegetable fat has to be non-lauric, rich in symmetrical monounsaturated 
triglycerides and must fall in POP (palmitic-oleic-palmitic aci d), STOST (stearic-oleic-stearic 
acid) or POST (palmitic-oleic-stearic acid) categories. So, the  content i.e. the characteristics of 
the milk chocolate, milk recoveri ng chocolate, plain chocolate,  plain covering chocolate, white 
chocolate, and blended chocolate were checked for a total 5 fat  types viz. total fat (%), milk fat 
(%), cocoa solids (%), milk solids (%), and acid insoluble ash (%). All these are specified like 
in all the cases, total fat shoul d be more than or equal to 25%  and acid insoluble ash should be 
less than or equal to 0.2%. Milk fat was not used in plain or w hite chocolate and in milk 
chocolates, it should be greater than or equal to 2%. Other tha n white chocolate, all the 
chocolates contain cocoa solids w ith minimum 12% in plain and 2 .5 to 3% in milk chocolates.      
Milk solids in milk chocolate, milk covering chocolate and whit e chocolate is greater than or 
Page 12 of 21 
 equal to 10.5% and in blended choc olate it should be in the ran ge of 1 to 9%. 
 
Food safety management system (FSMS) 
A FSMS is a network of interrelated elements that combine to en sure that the food does not 
cause any adverse human health effect when it is eaten. These e lements include programs, 
plants, policies, procedures, pr actices, processes, goals, obje ctives, methods, controls, roles, 
responsibilities, relationships, documents, records, & resource s. All these things should be done 
either at the manufacturer lev el, at the regulator level or at the company. 
Enable organizations to demonstrate their ability to control fo od safety standards, to 
demonstrate compliance to statuto ry and regulatory requirements , evaluate assess and meet 
customer requirements, communicates food safety information thr oughout the food chain, 
enables evaluate and updation of the system and ensure food is safe at the time of consumption. 
 
Key elements to ensure food safety 
Page 13 of 21 
 There are five key elements to ensure food safety which are int eractive communication, 
management element/system (EMS), good manufacturing practices ( GMP), HACCP, and 
operational prerequisite program mes (PRPs). Interactive communi cation is where there is 
proper understanding and interact ion between human, machines to  ensure food safety. EMS 
manages one or more specific t ypes of telecommunication network  element. GMP are the 
procedures that should be followed during plant construction as  well as operation of the plant 
to assure food wholesomeness to ensure production of safe food.  Then hazard analysis or 
HACCP that defines control for specific hazards in manufacturin g, processing or handling 
process. Operational prerequisite programs (PRPs) are the progr ams that are put in place in 
facility to control hazards in environment, preventing contamin ation of products. 
 
Hazard Analysis and Critic al Control Point (HACCP) 
HACCP is the recommend approach t o control the possibility of a ny toxic contaminations or 
any hazardous matters present in the food. This approach has si gnificant benefits to 
organizations operating within the food supply chains as it ena b l e s  t h e m  t o  d e t e r m i n e  k e y  
controls over processes and concentrate resources on activities  that are critical to ensure a safe 
food. The food may contain hazards like physical hazards, chemi cal hazard or microbial hazard 
and therefore every possible approach should be taken to contro l minimize this hazards. There 
are seven principles of HACCP protocol according to which the f irst is the analyze the hazards, 
other physical, biological, chemi cal, etc., and then identify t he critical control point in the 
process chain or in the value chain, establish the critical lim it, establish monitoring process, 
establish corrective action, esta blish a verification procedure  and finally established record 
keeping and document practices.  
Page 14 of 21 
  
Physical hazards 
Physical hazards relate to vario us foreign particles not normal ly found in the product. The 
nature of the physical hazards in the food chain is rather diff erent from the nature of the other 
hazards. Besides, compared with the chemical or microbiological  hazards, physical hazards are 
less likely to affect large number of people. The various physi cal sources of the hazards are 
cigarettes, matchsticks, stones, stems, seeds, hairs, buttons, bone fragments, nails, bolds, bolts 
etc.  
 
Chemical & Microbiological hazards 
Chemical hazards are important t o differentiate between the res idues such as pesticides, growth 
promoters, and veterinary medicines, contaminants such as dioxi n, polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCBs) and heavy metals. Microbiological hazards are bacteria, yeast, protozoa, mold, viruses 
such as Clostridium botulium, Clostr idium peifringens, Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus aureus, 
Salmonella, Shigella and Campilobacter , and the intestinally pathogenic, Escherichia coli , 
Page 15 of 21 
 cause the majority of food-poisoni ng cases. Anything which come  in contact with the fruit, 
vegetable or food during the pr oduction or post production they  may create hazards.   
 
HACCP for fruit or vegetable processing 
HACCP analysis of fruits and vegetables (F&V) contains first re ceiving of raw material 
followed by its chemical storage or sometimes direct packaging.  The biological hazard or the 
chemical hazard are important or where the physical hazards are  t h e r e  t h a t  i s  t h e s e  a r e  t h e  
indicated by BCP, and then the whole value chain particularly w here CCP, one should take care 
of critical control points whi ch are shown in the figure.  
The process starts from receiving of the raw material followed by its chemical storage or 
sometimes even direct packaging. So, they are inspected, washed , cut into pieces and finally, 
moisture is removed, followed by mixing etc. At each and every stage, appropriate measures 
should be taken to check the hazards in the value chain particu larly which are vulnerable to 
allow the growth of microorganisms though it may become zero if  the final product is sterilized.  
 
Page 16 of 21 
 Hazards in processing of fruit and vegetable juice 
In the given table, details of hazards in processing of fruit a nd vegetable juice is given at each 
processing stage from receiving the fruit till packaging. Diffe rent physical, chemical, and 
biological contamination are identified at each stage. For exam ple, during receiving of fruit, 
sand, pest, stones and woods are physical contamination; pestic ides, fungicides, toxic chemicals 
are chemical contamination; microorganism presence are biologic al contamination. Similarly, 
different contaminations were f ound during storage, cleaning, b elt washing, peeling, pulping, 
mixing, holding, straining, thermal processing, cooling, and pa ckaging i.e. at each stage. In 
peeling, there may be presence of metal pieces i.e. peeling kni ves etc. or even chemical 
contamination come from the chemicals and pesticides, or contam ination due to unclean 
equipment etc. 
 
Similarly, in thermal processing, there may be physical contami nation from the unsanitized 
equipment, chemical contamination maybe from the sanitizer resi due or biological 
contamination maybe from microbial survivor due to insufficient  temperature or holding time. 
So, various stages, what are the various sources from each diff erent contamination and hazards 
may come.  
Measures to control hazards (CP)  and critical control points (C CP) 
As discussed earlier, at each processing stage, there may be ch ances of physical, chemical or 
biological hazards. Thus, various measures should be taken to c ontrol these hazards. So, CP 
CCP are developed at each processing stage in a value chain. Fo r example, during cleaning, 
equipment should be periodically checked and maintained, water should be chlorinated, and 
microbiological testing should be done regularly. During storag e, maintain ideal storage 
conditions. These precautions for  cleaning sanitizing equipment  will prevent the biological 
Page 17 of 21 
 hazards and comes under CP. So, follow appropriate practice, ap propriate cleaning, sanitizers 
and other practices, use proper pr ocedures and maintain such th at there is no contaminations. 
 
 
These basic processes have CP wh ereas in technical portion, we need CCP such as in the thermal 
processing, temperature and pres sure should be properly maintai n e d  t o  g e t  t h e  d e s i r e d  
sterilization or  pasteurization.   
HACCP of spice processing 
The HACCP of the spice processing, starting from the harvesting  and transporting till it is 
storage, packed, dried and tran sported. After harvesting, these  spices are washed and sorted for 
getting optimum quality followed by seed removal. The seedless spice are dried in oven at 
industrial scale or s un drying at small scal e. The dried spices  are grounded and checked for the 
presence of aflatoxin, etc., gr ound spices are packaged in, sto red in bulk and finally the packages 
spices are zipped. In different stages, there will be different  CCPs i.e. for each and every step 
Page 18 of 21 
 there is a CCP which need s to be properly followed.  
 
 
 
Measures to control hazards a nd CCP in spice processing 
The measures to control hazards and critical control points in spice processing at various stages 
is shown in table. For example,  in drying, the potential hazard s may be fungus growth or it may 
be the hazards from soil, from material or contamination of afl atoxin which needs to be checked.  
So, the preventive measures should be taken such as direct cont ent with the soil should be 
Page 19 of 21 
 prevented, personal hygiene (GMP) i.e. people who are involved in drying should maintain 
personal hygiene, and then the drying particularly for pepper s hould be made as soon as possible 
using all the necessary protocols. So, these are the various CC Ps which are described in detail 
in the table. Similarly, in the storage, packaging, transport e tc. for the spices, various stages 
have various critical points th at needs to be controlled.   
 
HACCP of chocolate processing 
The chocolate processing as discu ssed earlier with different me thods of the chocolate 
manufacturer starting from cocoa  beans to bar. The HACCP of cho colate includes inspection 
and cleaning of fresh cocoa beans followed by roasting and shel ling. So, particularly in roasting, 
CCP is required because it facili tated production of the flavor  of the bean and also destroyed 
the contaminated microorganism etc. So, there is the CCP 1. The n, CCP 2 is very necessary i.e. 
in the environment where these processes is done should be main tained.  During mixing also 
CCP2 was taken care of as the materials and other equipment nee d to be proper sanitized and 
manufacturing was done in prope r sanitary conditions.  
 
Page 20 of 21 
 Summary 
The FSMS guidelines are very important to ensure safety and qua lity of the food products. The 
food safety and standard authorities has the power to decide th e guidelines and safety standards 
which needs to be updated periodically with scientific committe e. The industry must follow 
FSSAI guidelines and it is prescribed for the particular produc t or commodity.  Different food 
products like thermally processed vegetables and fruits, juices , nectars, etc. must meet the 
quality limits specified by FSSAI before reaching to the consum er. Basic elements in food 
safety includes GMP, PRPs, HACCP and FSMS. HACCP must be follow ed for fruit, vegetable, 
spices and plantati on crop processing. 
 
 
These are the references used in this lecture. 
Page 21 of 21 
  
Thank you very much. 
