1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H. N. Mishra 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 
Module 4 Lecture 16 
Cleaning and Washing  
 
 
The topics which will be covered in this lecture include, clean ing and washing of fruits and 
vegetables, cleaning of spices and condiments, good practices f or cleaning and washing 
operations, cleaning and sanitizi ng agents, and some of the com monly used cleaning and 
washing equipment.  2 
 
 
Cleaning is a post-harvest operation of removing foreign impuri ties such as soil, debris, and 
any pesticide residues from the  horticultural commodity or from  a surface, such as utensils 
and equipment used in handling, processing and storage. It is d one either by washing, or by 
brushing, or some time both was hing and brushing are used.  
It is an important operation because it improves appearance of the commodity, it helps in 
maintaining the quality of the produce, and also increases the shelf-life. Various methods of 
cleaning fruits and vegetables i nclude dry cleaning, trimming, wet cleaning, etc.  
 
In this table enlists different contaminants which are found in  the raw horticultural produces. 
The contaminants such as ferrous and nonferrous metal particles  (e.g. filings, nuts, bolts) are 
produced after mechanical harvesting, and found in handling and  processing equipment. 
Similarly, even the leaves, twigs, seed, or weeds, pods, skins of other plants may come from 
various plant sources, or differe nt crops in the field. Hairs, bones, excreta, blood, insects, 
larvae may come from the various animals. Other common contamin a n t s  a r e  b a c t e r i a l  s o f t  3 
 rot, fungal growth, yeast, or various toxin produced by the mic roorganisms, which are found 
in different products. 
 
Dry cleaning, refers to the use of air, or dry brushes, or clot hs to clean the fruit and 
vegetables. This is done with the help of machines which are fi tted with brushes, and is used 
in crops that can be adequately cleaned without water. Soft tis sues and delicate commodities 
with large water-adhering surf aces areas such as berries and gr apes are generally dry-cleaned 
using air blowers or vacuum methods. Brushes loosen any leaf or  lightly attached particles 
and give a polishing effect. Dry brushing can be done for remov al of white cottony mealy 
bugs attached in between the surfaces holes of the custard appl e fruits. The fruits and 
vegetables, which are generally s uitable for dry cleaning inclu de onion, garlic, okra, grapes, 
strawberry, mushroom, etc.  
 
Trimming is the removal of the unwanted leaves, stems or roots prior to their packaging and 
storage. It improves attractiven ess of the produce, and also re duces storage space by 
eliminating the unwanted materials. Trimming reduces the likeli hood of disease or their 4 
 spread, facilitating packaging and handling and reduces damages  to other products. It is done 
in some vegetables like lettuce,  cabbage, cauliflower etc. In c ase of grapes, trimming of 
bunches is done to remove the unde rsize, immature, dried, split  and damaged berries.  
 
In wet cleaning, or washing, the produce is washed with clean w ater usually by putting in a 
water tank having a continuous flo w of water and agitation. Was hing under a shower with 
pressurized water is more helpful in removing the soil from the  root vegetables like carrot, 
radish, turnip, etc. Rotary drum machines, or barrel washers is  used for potato and other root 
vegetables. Brush washers take c are of cleaning of individual f ruits or vegetables. So, wet 
cleaning or washing applications may be done to remove soil and  pesticide residues in the 
root crops, soft fruits and vegetables due to lesser mechanical  damage. It is more effective 
than dry cleaning, because less damage is here and better clean ing is there. It causes greater 
microbial deterioration. In this the deterioration, or removal of the microorganism, microbial 
contamination is more here in the case of wet cleaning, then in  comparison to that of the dry 
cleaning. Use of recirculated, fi ltered, and chlorinated water is to ensure that the cleaning is 
proper.  
The washing can be done either batch wise, or in continuous man ner. So, generally in the 
small factory, washers tubs are used. Whereas, in the big facto ries, continuous type washing 
systems are used. The different washing methods commonly used a re soaking, water sprayer, 
rotating drum, rotating brus h, and vibrate washers.  
 5 
 
 
 
In the soaking method, the flowing water or other liquid, are u sed for soaking of 
commodities. It is only effective to eliminate dust, or other i mpurities which are attached on 
the surface of the produce. This method is often used as a pre- cleaning operation. Water 
sprayer varies from low pressure to high, or wide angle to stra ight to the product. It is 
effective to remove firmly attached soil or dirt. This method c a n  b e  u s e d  f o r  a  v a r i e t y  o f  
products but with appropriate pressure settings. The rotating d rum are used for commercial 
scale because of simple, high capacity, and immediate cleaning,  and minor damage to the 
product. The level of cleanliness depends upon the rotating dru m speed, the roughness of the 
surface drum, and the time of washing.  6 
 
 
In the rotating brush system, a brush that rotates, and have hi gher effectiveness. This method 
is effective for removing sand, clay, or pesticide residues. Br ush can be made from fiber, 
rubber, or sponge, or other materials that can be replaced afte r wear out. Vibrates washer 
works by the strong vibration, which needs strong construction due to high vibration, and 
repeated mechanical wear and tear. So, it is a good practice by  the industry to follow a 
combination of these methods. So, good washing procedures are u sing a combination of two 
or more procedures, the washing procedures can be integrated wi th the materials inside the 
factory.  
 
The roller with brush cleaning machine consists of a roller wit h brush washing (cleaning) 
system. It is made up of stainless steel tube and brush. The br ush is made of polyethylene, 
and will make revolution as the m ovement of stainless steel cha in. Fruits are driven to 
circumvolve and washed by brush. At the same time, the bad or r ejected fruits are picked up 
manually and then sent away by scrap conveying device. It can b e used for washing and 7 
 cleaning of root vegetables and tubers such as taro, sweet pota to, radish, carrot, potato, 
ginger, etc. That is mostly t he root vegetables and tubers. 
 
The washing processes which are used for the fresh produces lik e, apple, cucumbers, and 
other firm produces requires the removal of waxy preservative i n warm water. In the root 
vegetable like potato, carrot, t urnips, these are cleaned with firm scrub brush, under 
lukewarm running water. Fruits like melons are cleaned with a v egetable brush, and washed 
thoroughly under the running water.  Fruits like peaches, plums,  and other soft fruits, these are 
washed under running water, and dried with a paper towel. Grape s, cherries, and berries are 
washed gently under cold running water, right before their use.  Mushrooms are cleaned with 
a soft brush, or wipe with a soft wet paper towel to remove the  dirt. Herbs are rinsed by 
dipping and swishing in a bowl of  cool water, and a dry with pa per towels.  
 
The fruits and vegetables because of their proximity to the soi l, in the root, tubers, they might 
be associated with various microbial contaminants, thus, it bec omes very important to 
sanitize these commodities. So, along with the washing water, s ome sanitizers are added. The 8 
 commonly used sanitizers include halogens (chlorine, chlorine d ioxide, iodine, bromide), 
ionic compounds (trisodium phosphat e, quaternary ammonium compo unds), active oxygen 
compounds (hydrogen peroxide, peracetic acid, ozone), irradiati on and pulsed light 
treatments (ionizing radiation, ultraviolet light, infrared lig ht), and combination of multiple 
procedures that supplement and e nhance each other’s effectivene ss. 
 
Advantages and disadvantages of  commercially used sanitizing ag ents 
The allowable levels of chlorine are 50 to 200 ppm, 1 to 2 min contact time, and the pH of 
water should be 6.0-7.5. The advantages of this sanitizing agen t are cheaper, easy to use, 
effective, can be bought over-the- counter. This is corrosive to  equipment (stainless steel, 
aluminium), degrades with age and exposure to sunlight and heat , does not work with high 
organic loads in water; and pH d ependent. Similarly, less than 3 ppm of chlorine oxide is 
recommended for fruits and vegetables, and 1 ppm on peeled pota toes. It is easy to use and 
effective at low concentrations. The disadvantages include brea king down with exposure to 
sunlight, has to be generated on -site before use, not as stable  as chlorine, and cost is about 
twice as much as chlorine. The desired level of acidified sodiu m chlorite is 500-1200 ppm at 
pH 2.3 to 2.9, and it is better at killing microorganisms than chlorine because of                    
low pH as well as it is gene rated on-site by blending before us e. 9 
 
 
For peracetic acid, the recommended level is less than 80 ppm w hen used on fruits and 
vegetables, it is noncorrosive to equipment, works at a wide ra nge of pH values and 
temperature. And it is not as sensitive to organic load as chlo rine. However, its cost is more 
than the chlorine. The allowabl e level of hydrogen peroxide is less than 59 ppm, when 
blended with acetic acid, and applied to fruits and vegetables t h a t  a r e  n o t  R A C .  I t  i s  
environmentally friendly and has been declared as GRAS2 by FDA.  Higher concentrations 
can cause browning, or bleaching in certain products, and can b e corrosive and irritating. It is 
unstable and degrades fast. There are no regulatory limits or l evels for ozone, but typically it 
is used at 2 to 10 ppm for up to  5  m i n u t e s ,  i t  i s  d e c l a r e d  G R A S  by FDA. It is also 
environmental friendly, effectiv e at low concentration, but it has to be generated on-site. It is 
unstable for highly reactive, corrosive to equipment, and OSHA requirements on employee 
exposure. 
 
Good cleaning practices and protoc ols (GCP) has to be followed at each and every stage of 
cleaning. For example, in harves t containers and receiving area s, remove as much as dirt as 10 
 possible from the harvest contai ners, trailers, and boxes betwe en the harvest uses. This should 
be done outside the cleaning and packing facility, and isolated  from water source for 
processing. Containers that have  been in direct contact with so il, should be specifically 
marked, and should not be allowed to enter the receiving or pac kaging area at any time. Use a 
second set of containers and handling boxes inside the facility , mark them especially to be 
used inside the facility.  
 
Proper cleaning procedure is to be followed, which should be ef ficient and effective to 
remove soil and dirt by dry clea ning, brushing, or air blower. Initially wash with water to 
remove surface dirt, or dry-cl ean for delicate commodities. Was h with sanitizing agent, 
usually chemical disinfectant et cetera. And then, perform a fin al rinse with the water. 
 
Quality of the washing water is again an important aspect. Wash ing water must be free from 
microbial pathogens. Recycled water should be treated, and main tained in proper condition. 
To ensure better product quality, keep water temperature as low  as possible. Monitor the 
treatment and quality of the water, and keep it under control. The sanitizing agents which are 11 
 used should be effective to reduce the microbial contamination,  but not completely eliminate 
them.  
 
Storage of sanitizers must be separated from fresh produce and packing material. Carefully 
follow specific handling and usage instructions for each produc t. Employees must wear 
goggles, gloves and protective cl othing when using alkaline or acid agents. As sanitizers are 
classified as pesticide agents, country-specific regulations fo r proper disposal should be 
followed. Regularly train employees and operators on safe handl ing and preparation 
practices. 
 
Proper cleaning of spices and condiments should be done to ensu re removal of the foreign 
matters found in the herbs and sp ices supplied by farmers. The impurities include sand, 
stones, dust, nails, bailing wire , pieces of jute, cotton threa ds, nuts, bolts, pieces of charcoal, 
toys, rodent droppings, and dead and live insects. Cleaning in a factory fitted with modern 
equipment is very important to  ensure that the end-product is o f sufficient quality. Cleaning 12 
 operation should conserve the mentioned basic qualities such as  aroma, flavour, pungency, 
bite, and colour. 
 
Cleaning equipment must take into consideration the size, shape  and density of the herbs or 
spices to be cleaned. The equipment commonly used for removing foreign materials includes 
magnetic separator, sifters, air tables, de-stoners, air separa tors, indent separators, spiral 
gravity separators. Cleaning ope rations are expensive consideri ng the cost of equipment and 
labour, and the likely loss of t he product during the operation . 
 
In magnetic separator, magnets remove iron particles and pieces  of metal and protect grinding 
equipment from damage. The forms of the magnet may be plate typ e, or bar type. Since the 
iron particles are removed only if  they come into contact with the magnet, the flow of the 
product past the magnet should not be too dense. The magnets mu st also be cleaned 
periodically, according to a schedule designed around the quali ty requirement. A system that 
allows the product to flow over two or three magnets is much mo re effective than using a 
single magnet. 13 
 
 
Sifters remove particles of the  wrong size from the product via  a set of vibrating screens.  The 
efficiency of the sifters depend upon the uniform size of the p roduce. The sifting operation 
may not be 100% efficient if the products are not uniformly sph erical or round. In such 
situations, the sifting operation becomes very difficult and do es not clean the product 
effectively.  
 
Air tables separate light and heavy materials, and are commonly  used for cleaning spices.  
The spice is put on a wire mesh screen fixed to the table and a  stream of air is passed through 
the screen. Light materials are suspended higher in the air and  are thrown out by the force of 
the air. Rotational vibration is adjusted so that heavy particl es are pushed up the screen by 
repeated tapping. The tilt, rota tional vibration of the screen,  and the air flow, are adjustable as 
per specified requirements for the particular spice being clean ed.  14 
 
 
Air separators also work on the same principle as that of air t ables. The difference here is that 
a thin stream of the herb or spi ce is made to fall through a ho r i z o n t a l  a i r  f l o w .  H e a v i e r  
particles fall straight to the bot tom, while lighter particles are blown to the side. Some air 
separators operate with a vertic al flow of air, but the princip le of operation is the same.  
 
De-stoners work according to the same principles as air tables and are generally smaller than 
air tables. They are used to remove heavy stones and pieces of rock, while air tables separate 
the product into as many groups as necessary. The air flow, inc lination and vibration of the 
screen, and the type of screen use d, are adjusted as per the ma terials being separated.  15 
 
 
Indent separators work on the difference in shape between the h erb or spice and the foreign 
materials. The herb or spice is fed into one end of a revolving  drum with rows of uniformly 
shaped indentations designed to f it only the herb or spice bein g separated. As the drum 
revolves, the centrifugal forces h old the desired material in t hese cavities, while foreign 
materials remain in the centre  of the drum. The rotational forc es move the herb or spice out of 
the machine and into a collection trough and the foreign materi als are collected separately 
and disposed of. Different herbs  and spices require different d rum designs, depending on 
their size and shape.  
 
Spiral gravity separators are us ed to separate spherical spice seeds from non-spherical 
material including other seeds an d rodent excreta. The spiral s eparator consists of a U-shaped 
trough that curves downward into a spiral through which the sph erical spice seeds (black or 
white pepper) are fed into the top of the separator. They gain sp eed  a s th ey  ro ll d o w n  th e 
chute, and as they pick up speed, the centrifugal forces drive them up the side of the chute. 
Non spherical low dense seeds cannot attain the same speed, so they slide down to the centre 
of the chute. A divider at the bottom of the chute separates th e spice seeds at the side of the 16 
 chute from the foreign materials in the centre of the chute. Sp iral separators do not require a 
motor or blower, as gravitational forces are sufficient to achi eve the separating effect.  
 
The above equipments are used for the on-farm cleaning operatio n, but the same system can 
be used for in-plant cleaning as well. But there are certain po ints to be noted for the important 
for the in-plant cleaning like equipment should be such designe d that thorough cleaning and 
disinfection are easily possible.  Buildings, equipment, impleme nts, utensils and all other 
physical equipment and facilities should be regularly checked a nd cleaned in a timely and 
appropriate manner. Staff members responsible for cleaning and hygiene and should have 
sufficient knowledge about the possible contaminations and heal th hazards. Disinfestation 
and pest control in the processi ng facility and storage areas s hould be regular. Waste material 
should be collected in a systematic manner and removed from han dling and working areas as 
often as necessary.  
 
In summary, cleaning is very important operation in a food indu stry as it reduces the 
likelihood of diseases or their sp read, facilitate s packaging a nd handling, and reduces damage 17 
 to other produces. Cleaning equipment must take into considerat ion the size, shape and 
density of the fruits, vegetables, herbs or spices to be cleane d.  Cleaning in a factory fitted 
with modern equipment is very important to ensure that the end- product is of sufficient 
quality.  The employees and operators in food processing plants  must ensure safe cleaning 
and washing practices. 
 
These are the references  for further study. Thank you. 