1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra  
 Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture 02  
Fruits and Vegetables 
In this lecture, the topics on the classification, composition,  nutritional value of major fruits 
and vegetables of India and its consumption pattern (both raw a nd processed form) will be 
covered. Also, the importance and health benefits along with th e physiochemical, textural, 
microbiological and other quality characteristics as well as ma turity indices of major fruits 
and vegetables will be discussed. 
 
 2 
 
 
Fruits and their classification 
The botanic term “fruit” refers to the seeds and surrounding ti ssues of a plant. The foods that 
are commonly referred to as “fruits” for culinary purposes are pulpy seeded tissues that have 
a sweet taste (for example oranges, apples, pears, blueberries)  o r  t a r t  t a s t e  ( l i k e  l e m o n s ,  
limes, cranberries).   
The fruits can be classified based on the climatic adaptability  such as temperate, tropical, and 
subtropical fruits, bearing ha bit, fruit morphology, rate of re spiration, and botanical 
classifications.  
 
Classification based on morphology 
1. Simple fruits: are derived from single ovary (Ex. Berry), where the wall of th e fruit is 
fleshy (Ex. Banana, papaya, and sapota). 3 
 2. Modified berry: include Balusta, Amphisarca, Pepo (i.e. berry with a hard thick  grind), 
Pome (which has ovary or core surrounded by edible, flussy tiss ue), Drupe (fles hy fruit with 
hard inner layer), Hersperidium (berry with a leathery rind and  parchment-like partitions), 
Nut (larger, one seeded fruit with  very hard pericarp), and Cap sule (where seed pod splits 
open). 
3. Aggregate fruits: are a cluster or aggregation of m any ripened ovaries which are produced 
from a single flower (Ex. Str awberries and Custard Apple). 
4. Multiple fruits: are derived from separate but closely clustered flowers (Ex. Jackfr uit and 
Pineapple). 
 
Classification based on rate of respiration 
Based on the rate of respiration, the fruits are classified int o two groups: climacteric and non-
climacteric. The fruits such as banana, papaya, apples etc. are  come under climacteric fruits 
where there is a significant inc rease in the rate of respiratio n after the ripening stage. 
Finally, the fruit respiration comes to its climatic maxima and  senescence starts. At the 
climatic maxima point, the fruit is at its maximum keeping valu e (or eating value) after that 
senescence starts and product spoils. 
In the case of non-climatic fruits, there is a continuous decre ase in both the rate of respiration 
as well as ethylene producti on after the harvesting of product.  
The vegetables are the edible part of plants which includes ste ms and stalks like (eg. celery), 
roots (eg. carrots), tubers (eg. potatoes), bulbs (eg. onions) leaves (eg. spinach, lettuce), 
flowers (eg. artichokes) and othe r fruits (eg. cucumber, pumpki ns, and tomatoes), seeds (eg. 
beans, peas). Vegetables are gene rally less sweet are tart than  fruits and are usually consumed 
as salads cooked side dish es and savory appetizers. 4 
 
 
 
Composition & Nutritional val ue of fruits and vegetables 
About 70 to 90% of the most fruits and vegetables are mainly co mposed of water (Ex. 
Tomato contains 96% and cucumber contains 98% water). Fruits an d vegetables are major 
source of micronutrients such as fiber and micronutrients such as minerals, vitamin C, 
thiamin, riboflavin, B 6, niacin, folate, A and E. Phytochemicals in fruits and vegetab les, such 
as polyphenolics, carotenoids, a nd glucosinolates, also provide  their nutritional value. Initial 
nutrient content is affected by the cultivar, soil type, produc tion system, and weather 
conditions during the growth. Remaining changes in nutrient com position from harvest to 
consumption depends upon the nutrient, commodity, and post-harv est handling, storage, and 
cooking conditions.  
 5 
 
 
Nutritive value of fruits 
Fruits are important sources o f vitamins and carbohydrates like  fibers and sugar. Ripe fruits 
contain a higher percentage of sugars chiefly present in the fo rm of sucrose, fructose and 
glucose. Fruits are poor sources of protein and fat. Generally,  fruits are poor sources of iron 
except for certain fruits like Seethaphal. Mangoes are the exce llent sources of carotenes. 
Apart from mango, Indian dates, papaya and oranges also provide  β-carotene. Sea buckthorn 
and Amla are the richest sources of vitamin C followed by guava . Citrus fruits are cheap and 
popular sources of vitamin C. Some fruits like apples, pears, c herries, grapes and citrus fruits 
contain flavonoids that act as antioxidants.  
 
The table represents the nutritional compositions such as moist ure, energy, protein, fat, 
carbohydrate, calcium, iron, carote ne, and vitamin C of some ma jor fruits of India including 
banana, mango, orange, papaya, guava. 6 
 
 
Nutritive value of vegetables 
Vegetables contribute to the fibre content of the diet. They ar e fairly good source of vitamins 
and minerals. Green leafy vegetables are good sources of β-caro tene, calcium, riboflavin, 
folic acid, ascorbic acid, iron and vitamin K. Green leafy vege tables also contain vitamin C 
and can be used as substitute for fruits if needed. Agathi, dru mstick leaves and coriander 
leaves contribute to vitamin C. Roots and tubers give more calo ries compared to green leafy 
vegetables because they contain more starches. Roots and tubers  are fairly good sources of 
vitamin C. Most of the vegetab les are poor sources of protein a nd fat.  
 
The table represents the nutri tional compositions such as energ y values, dietary fiber, sugars, 
Vitamin A & C, calcium, and iron of some major vegetables of In dia including potato, onion, 
tomato, cabbage, and cauliflower. 7 
 
 
Health benefits of fru its and vegetables 
It is said that “an apple a day keeps doctor away, a banana a d ay keeps hospital away”. So, 
these fruits and vegetables are health promoting nutrients incl uding both macronutrients and 
micronutrients. They add flavor and color to the diet; supply e ssential micronutrients. Fruits 
and vegetables maintain a wide  variety of metabolic functions i n the body and also provide 
bulk to the diet which aids in excretion processes and improves  the digestion. They provide 
dietary fibers and bioactive fo r health promotion and disease p revention.  
The benefit of a diet rich in fruits and vegetables is attribut ed to the complex mixture of 
phytochemicals strongly associated  with the reduced risk of car diovascular diseases, cancer, 
obesity, diabetes, Alzheimer disease, cataracts and age-related  function functional decline of 
the body.  
 
 8 
  
Health benefits of selecte d fruits and vegetables 
Studies suggest that grapefruits (both red and pink) have impor tant antioxidant benefits due 
to presence of lycopene. Cantaloupes contain a diverse profile of nutrients like β-carotene, 
which could lower the risks for developing asthma. Apples conta in phytonutrients like apple 
polyphenol which could help with the regulation of the blood su gar levels. Lemon/limes are 
excellent source of vitamin C. Papaya are a good source of diet ary fiber which has been 
shown to reduce high cholesterol levels. Pears are a good sourc e of dietary fiber, which could 
help to reduce type-2 diabetes. C ranberries have proanthocyanid in, which is known to help 
treat and prevent urinary tract i nfections. Cauliflower contain  glucoraphanin which could be 
converted into sulforaphane to provide immune system benefits. Carrots contain an 
abundance of vitamin A which is known for improving the vision and preventing eye 
diseases. Beets contain a specifi c type of fiber which could pr ovide health benefits such as 
reducing the risk of colon cancer. Swiss chards contain syringi c acid which could help people 
with diabetes by regulating blood sugar levels. So, these fruit s and vegetables contain variety 
of health promoting ingredients.  
 9 
 
 
Economic importance of fruits and vegetables 
In India, fruits and vegetables account for nearly 90% of the t otal horticulture production.  
India is now the second largest producer of fruits and vegetabl es in the world. It is the leader 
in several horticultural crops, namely mango, banana, papaya, c ashew nut, areca nut, potato, 
and okra. India produced 99.07 million tonnes of fruits and 191 .77 million tonnes of 
vegetables. The area under cult ivation of fruits stood at 6.66 million hectares while 
vegetables were cultivated at 10.35 million hectares. During 20 20-21, India exported fruits 
and vegetables worth Rs. 4,971.22 crores and Rs. 4,969.73 crore s, respectively. In FY 2019, 
~8.31 million tonnes of fruits and vegetables were processed in  India,                        
which is expected to reach 16.39 Mn tons by 2024, expanding at a CAGR of                        
~14.84% during the FY 2020-24. 
 
Economic importance of fruits and vegetables 10 
 The left hand side figure represents the progressive increase i n the gross value added from 
fruits and vegetables in India from the financial year 2012 to 2019. The right hand side figure 
denotes the volume of horticultu ral produces exported from Indi a in the financial year 2021 
and it can be clearly observed that fresh vegetables positioned  first followed by fresh fruits, 
processed fruits and juices, pro cessed vegetables, vegetable/fr uit seeds, and lastly floriculture. 
 
 
The table represents the area of cultivation (in thousand hecta res) and production (in 
thousand MT) of major fruits  of India in the year 2017-18, 2018 -19, and 2019-20. 
 
The table represents the area of cultivation (in thousand hecta res) and production (in 
thousand MT) of major vegetables  of India in the year 2017-18, 2018-19, and 2019-20.   
Quality characteristics of fruits and vegetables 11 
 Quality is defined as the degree of excellence of a particular product or its suitability for a 
particular use. It includes value attributes such as purity, co mpositional integrity, size, 
appearance, taste, conveni ence of preparation. 
Generally, nutritional attributes are considered as fat content , total calories, fibre, sodium, 
vitamins, minerals, other micro and micro nutrients which contr ibute to the nutritional quality 
characteristics of a product. 
 
 12 
 
 
Food safety is an important attribute consisting of food borne pathogens, presence of heavy 
metals, pesticide residues, food additives, naturally occurring  toxins which may lead to health 
hazards after consumption. 
 
Package attributes include the s uitable packaging material, lab eling and other information 
provided on the packet. The produc tion process attributes inclu de genetic modification, 
environmental impact on the product, pesticide use, and worker safety. 13 
 
 
Value attributes 
Texture is considered to be the v ery important quality attribut es. Texture is a key fruit and 
vegetable quality component when considering consumer acceptabi lity. Fruit texture, and 
particularly flesh firmness, is used as an important maturity i ndex, in combination with other 
quality parameters. Vegetables such as cucumbers, peppers, and potatoes, should be as firm 
as possible. The surface of fruits and melons should be smooth and firm. Texture can be 
determined by using texture analyze r or firmness of fruit is es timated by penetrometer. 
Morphology involves the physical form of the fruit or vegetable  s u c h  a s  s i z e ,  w e i g h t  o r  
curvature. Instruments such as scales, sizing machines and tape  measures are used to make 
non-destructive measur ements of morphology. 
 
Smell is an important value attribute especially in the fruits such as citrus. It gives 
information about the aromatic and volatile substances present in both the skin and pulp. 14 
 Objective way to measure it is through gas chromatography combi ned with mass 
spectrophotometry and elec tronic nose (E-Nose).   
The visual quality is one of the most important factor that det ermines the market value of 
fresh fruits and vegetables. Color is one of the primary indica tors of maturity or ripeness. It is 
a key indicator on how fresh the produce is alongside other vis ual cues. Coloration of fresh 
fruits and vegetables should be even without any marks or witho ut any marks and spots. The 
color can be measured by using cal orimeter, tintometer or Hunte r color difference meter.  
 
Internal quality characteristics 
The determination of internal qua lity characteristics require i nstruments such as soluble 
solids of food products are measured by refractometer and allow s to know the amount of 
sugar present in a sample, as the brix scale. It also indicates  the maturity of the fruit and 
indicates the best time to harvest a fruit. Acidity is obtained  through the juice of the fruit with 
a pH electrode. In addition to t he level of acidity present in the product being known, it 
allows to know what possibility e xists for proliferation of mic robes. Because the growth of 
the microorganisms is directly related to the pH or acidity of a product. This factor directly 
affects the ease with which external agents can enter. So, acid ity from that point of view 
becomes an important consideration.   15 
 
 
Maturity indices of fruits and vegetables 
Maturity 
The various maturity indices are harvest maturity, commercial m aturity, physiological 
maturity, and horticulture maturity. Harvest maturity  is the stage which will allow fruits/ 
vegetables are at their peak condition when it reaches to the c onsumers and develop 
acceptable flavor or appearance and having adequate shelf life.  The commercial maturity  is 
the stage of development when plant parts possess the necessary  characteristics which is 
preferred by the consumer that is it has a good eating quality.  The fruit should be good in 
taste, flavor, and color. So, commercial maturity should have a  good market value. 
Physiological maturity  is the stage in the development of the fruits and vegetables w hen 
maximum growth and maturation has occurred. Horticulture maturity  is the developmental 
stage of the fruit on the tree, which will result in a satisfac tory product after harvest.   
 16 
 The figure represents different m aturity indices of tomato. The  physiological maturity is the 
developmental stage in which size of the fruit increases and gr een color develops but during 
this stage the fruit is generally non-edible. In the commercial  maturity, red color develops and 
after this stage, product become s over mature and quality gets reduced.  
 
Maturity indices 
Maturity indices are  indications by which the maturity is judge d. It is necessary or  essential to 
pick up the fruit or vegetable at correct stage of maturity to facilitate proper ripening, distant 
transportation and maximum storag e life. The indices may be sub jective like qualitative 
which uses the sensors (color, size, shape, sound, firmness, ju ice content etc.) or objective 
like quantitative which are measurable indices (TSS, total acid ity, starch content, oil content, 
firmness, dry mater, days after full bloom, heat degree day, re spiration and ethylene 
production, production of  volatiles etc.). 
 17 
 The table shows different matur ity indices for selected fruits such as citrus, papaya, 
pineapple, grapes, mango, strawberry etc. As shown in the figur e, the banana undergoes 
different stages of maturity stages in which the angular shape is progressively changing into 
round shape as well as the color changes from green to yellow. Similar change in color was 
observed in various maturity  indices of strawberry. 
 
The table shows different maturity indices for selected vegetab les such as tomato, egg-plant, 
bitter gourd, water melon, musk  melon, snake gourd etc. As show n in figure, the color change 
is a major maturity i ndex of tomato as pres ented in stage 1 to 6. 
 
In summary, fruits are the ripened ovary and classified based o n their climatic adaptability, 
morphology and rate of respiration. Vegetables are the edible p ortion of the plant which 
might include stem, leaf, roots, flowers, fruits and seeds. Fru its and vegetables are the 
primary source of micronutrients, fiber in the diet. They also provide phytochemical and 
bioactive compounds with health benefits and disease prevention  properties. Fruits and 
vegetables accounts for 90% of the total horticulture productio n, their value is expected to 18 
 grow at a CAGR of ~14.84% during the FY 2020-24. Appearance, mo rphology, texture, 
flavour, TSS and total acidity remain as the major harvest indi ces and determines the quality 
of the fruits and vegetables. 
 
These are the references for  further study lecture. Thank you.  