Post-Harvest Operation and Proce ssing Of Fruits, Vegetables, Sp ices and Plantation  
Crop Product  
Professor H N Mishra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering.  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur   
Lecture 58   
Valorisation of Waste into Value-added Products  
 
 
 
 
This lecture is about Valorisation of waste into value-added Pr oducts. The various approaches 
for waste minimization, various case studies of mango, jackfrui t and tamarind processing by 
products and their valorisation,  manufacture of pectin’s and es sential oils from citrus and other 
fruit industry waste, manufactur e of ready to eat extruded prod ucts from apple pomace and food 
waste composting and bio-fuel from the fruits and vegetable pro cessing waste is discussed in 
this lecture.  
 
 
Food waste minimisation approaches 
The food waste minimization approaches include the solid waste management which consist of 
the following 
 Rethink 
 Re-decision 
 Reduce 
 Reuse 
 Recycle 
 Recover 
 Residual management  
 Disposal  
It is very helpful in the  circular economy where the raw mater ial instead of going in the landfill 
and can be utilised in end produc ts along with phases of water separation leading to end of 
product's life and recovery of the product.  
In general different legal principles of minimization of the wa ste from the food  industry or in 
particular the fruits and vegeta ble processing industry include  
 Determination of the boundary  system : determining the boundar y of the ecosystem. 
Measures to produce minimum waste and make appropriate changes in the  use of raw 
material, process operations, process technology and management  etc.   
 Quantification and categorizati on of the waste: different waste  can be categorized into 
different ways.  
 Assessment of the environmental im pact linked with each managem ent method. 
 Selection of the best alternat ive:  best method which reduces p roduces minimum waste 
and whatever waste is produced can be appropriately utilized re used recycled.  
 
 
Food waste valorisation  
The food waste valorisation is b asically the conversion of food  waste or by-products into higher 
value products that contribute back to the food supply chain. T his contributes to the circular 
economy approach, where useful material in the food processing industry which was seen as 
waste, is recycled back into the supply chain to create new pro ducts. It is collected and reused 
and then it is recycled back into the supply chain to create a new product. So, it generates value, 
it is one of the food waste recycling pathway  that can help to  close the appropriate food waste 
loop and there are nine stage cat egorization  of the waste incl ude the 
 Edibility: whether the wast e is edible or non-edible 
 State: that it is eatable or spoiled or already damaged even wa stage also disintegrated 
and  damaged 
 Origin: whether it is an animal based or plant based  
 Complexity: the single product waste or it is a multiple produc t waste  
 Animal product presence: anima l product, meat, by product from animal bodies and in 
contact or not in contact w ith animal waste product. 
 Stage of the supply chain:  where like it is a catering industr y waste, or non-catering 
industry waste. 
 Treatment: what are the treatments required for this processing  or unprocessed whether 
it is the processing waste or peeling waste or washing waste or  whatever type of 
wastage 
 Packaging: even what type of packaging material is used, it is packaged or unpackaged  
 Packaging material: it is biode gradable packaging or non-biodeg radable packaging  
 Then categorize it and approach the best management mechanism  and  accordingly go 
for the proper valorization of the product.  
 Preparation of the product either  extraction of bioactive, pigm ents or other ingredient 
making into various products.  
 
 
Tamarind kernel powder (TKP) 
Tamarind is a very useful fruit and it is used in the pickles, chutneys or in daily cooking etc. 
The fermentation of tamarind kern el or seed is done after the t amarind pulp is used for various 
value-added product. The kernel which is obtained it has got a very valuable component. So, 
the tamarind kernel that is a processing waste it is sorted and  then kernels are roasted and the 
outer cover hulls are removed and finally using appropriate gri nding methodology it is ground 
into fine powders.  
This tamarind kernel powder is b asically known as jellose or po lyose and it is used as a fruit 
preservative. It is used as a coating material in sauces, casti ngs, in a protective coating and even 
fried foods etc.  It has a very good viscosity whi ch is relativ ely higher than corn starchit is also 
relatively cheaper and a small quantity is required compared to  corn starch to get that desired 
effect. So, TKP has a various beneficial use in the food proces sing operations as the food 
additives in the food industry. 
TKP can be used as a thickening agent and bulking agent in the preparation of puddings, deserts, 
confectionery, sour milk gel, low water releasing gel, yogurt, jelly jam. It can be used in pie 
fillings and sauces, vegetable pancake or in protein free food etc.  
Thus, tamarind kernel can be collected and can be hygienically converted into good quality 
value powder. the powder characte ristic particularly starch qua lity is at par to available 
thickeners. So, TKP could be a very good business line and vari ous start-ups  could work in this 
direction.  
 
 
Jackfruit processing waste utilization 
In India, almost all state produce jackfruit and the jack fruit  and basically pulp is used for edible 
purposes and peel, seed and latex remain as waste. So, these ca n be for waste processing, they 
can be subjected to various treatment like the conversion techn ology.  For example  
1. Peel: Peel can be subjected to gravi metric method and the pectin ca n be extracted and 
pectin has various application in food industry. This peel can be used as activated carbon 
by conversion technology and this activated carbon can be used as absorbent.  The peel 
can be subjected to anaerobic digestion process and it can be c onverted into bio 
hydrogen which is a source of bioenergy.  
2. Seeds:  seeds can be dried and milled and one can get the seed flour a nd fermentation 
leading to red pigment. This can be used as a source of good st arch in various food 
preparations. Then granulation technique and encapsulation tech nique can be used in 
the contribution to confectionary  industry. The seed powder can  be used as a low GI 
ingredient and cellulose nano par ticle from seeds in the packag ing it can be made use 
up in packaging films.  
3. Latex: As a medicinal use latex fermented with mixed with vinegar whic h could heal 
abbesses and glandular swelling. then proximate enzymes extract ion can be used for 
pesticide detection in food testing laboratories.  Latex mixed with rubber and cement 
can be an excellent engineering material.  
 
 
Jackfruit waste utilization 
Jackfruit waste can be converted  into value added products i.e.  It can be used for making the 
low-cost material and utilized as a food packaging material to produce biodegradable film and 
leading to minimize the synthetic polymer utilization. So, jack fruit waste flour can be treated 
with polyvinyl alcohol and develo ped into eco-friendly composit e films, it can be used for 
packaging chocolate and many ot her confectionary products. some  institution in our country 
have worked on and they have developed edible plates from jackf ruit skins and seeds etc. About 
44 to 45% of the peel is used in flour and remaining that is ab out 4% is fat, 4% product is 
converted into biofilm or bio-chem, bioethanol or nanoparticle synthesis for processing. 
Similarly,  about 22% peel is converted into activated carbon and the other  into bio ethanol 
pectin, biofilm, bio-absorbency so, this has the potential to a pply.  
 
 
Mango processing waste utilization 
Another very important fruit crop in the country is mango and g enerally mango is used for its 
juice and pulp. So, the major by-products of mango is its peel and mango kernel. Seed has outer 
seed coat and inside there is a kernel.  The pulp is one useful  ingredient but after the juice 
extracted this pulp also had some fibrous components and even t he peel is a good source for 
quality fiber, good colours etc.  
For processing mangoes, cleaning sorting after that pulp is obt ained and then seed is recovered 
which have the coat and the kernel. The seed coat can be used a s a fuel. The kernel is steeped 
and dried and size reduction by which mango kernel powder and m ango kernel flour is obtained 
which has a good quality fat and carbohydrate and this can be d one by  fractionation. So, this 
flour further can be size reduced for formation of pectin by pr ecipitation or even polyphenol 
extraction or fractionation of  oil and starch. The of mang 
 
 
Mango waste can be utilized in many ways like jelly, packaging film, jam, etc. peel can be used 
for pectin purpose and also it can be used for enzyme extractio n fibers and bio absorbent. The 
seed can be used for a fat content that is it can be used to ke rnel oil or powder. the dried peel 
can be utilised either for pectin  or the colour which can be fu rther used in jelly and jams.   
The co-products lead to pectin recovery, bio-octophenols etc ca n be produced from mango 
waste. The peel can also be made into the glycerol or even othe r packaging material. So, waste 
can be utilized in many ways like in jelly and in the packaging  field for many other products. 
 
 
Mango kernel powder and oil 
Kernel milling leads to  kernel powder is obtained and th is powder can be subjected to S oxhlet 
extraction 50 to 60 degrees Celsius from where kernel residue a nd kernel oil is obtained. The 
oil can be subjected to fermentation in presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa  DR1 which have 
glycolipids like rhamnolipids.  
 
 
Mango kernel butter (MKB) - A good substitute of cocoa butter 
This mango kernel butter i.e. The oil has very characteristics similar to the cocoa butter. So, the 
mango seed oil can be converted into the mango butter and which  is a very good substitute of 
cocoa butter. When the melting profile is considered it was see n that cocoa butter is  very 
popular in confectionery ice cream and because it has a very go od melting  characteristics; it 
melts in the mouth and is soft in the hand. In the given  FTIR spectra graph as, shown the mango 
butter has almost melting characteristics similar to that cocoa  butter. 
The fatty acid profiles and other characteristics of MKB is ver y  a l s o  s i m i l a r .  T h e  o f f s e t  
temperature, onset temperature, peak temperature and enthalpy c hange of MKB and cocoa 
butter is comparable. So, this shows that this is a very good p roduct from the mango kernel or 
mango by-product and mango processing industry and it can be ex ploited in the contractionary 
product as a coco's substitute. So, MKB can be substituted up t o 80 percent level in some report 
says are the preparation of cocoa  in the dark chocolate prepara tion. 
 
 
Valorisation of citrus fruit processing waste 
The valorisation of citrus food processing waste from citrus fo ods can be used for both food 
usages as well and non-food usage. The by-product from citrus f ruit can be used as food 
additive, source of bioactive compounds, encapsulating agent an d it is an excellent source of 
prebiotic i.e.  The fiber, oligosaccharides and polysaccharide which are presen t in the citrus food 
waste is a very good prebiotic.  Same waste can be used in cosmetic industry for body sprays, 
body lotions, soaps, and also utilized as bio-fertilizer, bio-a bsorbent, etc.. So, a single good 
waste can have many foods waste or non-food waste applications.   
 
 
Manufacture of essential oils from citrus fruits peel 
citrus peels are very good source of essential oil. So, these c itrus peels can be used for 
extractions of oil.  For extraction one of the major processes with high extraction rates are 
ultrasound assisted or super critical fluid  extraction. The acc elerator clevenger operators is used 
for the extractions of essential oil from these materials becau se these essential oils are highly 
volatile. So, the temperature has to be properly adjusted. 
 
 
Manufacture of pectin from citrus fruit wastes 
One of the potential applications of the citrus peel that is es sential oil and another important 
utilization of the citrus fruit waste is the pectin. Both pomac e and peel can be the source. The 
orange peels is the heated with  the mother liquor and citric ac id in water bath. Then it is 
subjected to filtration and filter cake is obtained. The ethano l subject to precipitation up of the 
pectin and it is centrifuge. This  is characterized may be in je lly grade characterization. The 
pectin is dried in dryer and the dry pectin is obtained. 
The actual process parameters need to be standardized and optim ized and a well develop 
standard technology.  
 Pectin 1: Microwave hydro-dist illation followed by freeze dryin g 
 Pectin 2: Microwave hydro-diffusion and gravity followed by fre eze drying 
 
 
Process block diagram representing the unit operations to produ ce pectin and essential 
oil from orange residues 
This fig. Shows the process block diagram representing the unit  appraisals to produce pectin 
and essential oil from the orange  residues and this can be used  for any citrus fruit etc like orange 
peel waste or orange pulp waste i.e after the extraction of pul p and juice; the peel and pumace 
both are treated as waste. The pr ocess involves washing, drying  at around 40 to 60°C for 2 days 
and then it is milled less than 1 mm. So, it is now converted i nto fine powder which is subjected 
to steam distillation. After the s team distillation the essenti al oil is obtained.  
The residue which is obtain it can be subjected to acid hydroly sis treatment. In the presence of 
either HCL or citric acid temperature may be more than 90 degre e and pH is around 1.5 to 2 
and time duration maybe around 60 to 120 minutes. then it is ce ntrifuged and filtered after 
filtration and that filtrate is precipitated in the ethanol at 96% v/v for 24 hours at 20 25°C, then 
ethanol washing 50 to 60% (v/v). Then so it is followed by whit ening by the acetone washing. 
The precipitation by acetone washing and then finally centrifug e at 4 to 10°Celsius for 10 to 20 
minutes at 4000 to 9000 RPM. Then  vacuum drying at 40°C for 1 t o 2 hours and finally pectin 
is obtained. After ethanol washing whatever residue is remainin g, the bioactive compounds and 
the sugar etc can be extracted from this.  
 
 
Pectin 1 is obtained by microw ave hydro-distillation followed b y freeze drying and Pectin 2 is 
pectin obtained due to Microwave hydro-diffusion and gravity fo llowed by freeze drying. 
  
 
 
Manufacture of pectin powder from orange waste 
 
The manufacture of pectin powder is from sweet orange. The peel  is first washed and then dried 
at 60°C, then grinding followed by acid treatment and final ext raction in water bath. Vacuum 
filtration and centrifugation results in residue formation and precipitation.  The ethanol 
precipitation and filtration helps to obtain wet pectin and the n this wet pectin is dried and 
converted into pectin powder which can be further analyzed and  characterized. 
 
 
Manufacturer of pectin powder from the apple pomace 
H i m a c h a l  a n d  s u c h  a  J a m m u  K a s h m i r  a r e  t h o s e  r e g i o n  i n  o u r  c o u n t ry which produces 
significant quantity  of apple an d as apple is being used for m aking juice and other products . 
But after the preparation of the  juice, huge amount of waste t o go remain as the apple pomace 
and this apple pomace is a good  quality fiber.   
So, this pomace is collected, it is branched that around 95°C f or 5 minute and  then dry it at 
50°C to about 10 percent final moisture content then it is subj ected  to HCL extraction by .05N 
HCL for 60 minute at 95°C  which is then filtered to get the re sidue and pectin extract. Extract 
is then precipitated with 95% ethanol then again filtered by a thick cloth. Then again washed 
with 95% ethanol  followed by 70% ethanol to remove the residue  acid. Then it is pressing to 
remove excess ethanol followed by drying at around 50°C. The dr ied mass is  grounded into  
pectin powder and then it is p ackaged in polyethene films. 
 
 
Manufacture of RTE extruded produc ts from processing by-product s 
These fruits and vegetable indu stry waste and other food indust ry waste can also be used for  
manufacture ready to eat extrude d products, like earlier said t hat apple pomace, or grape 
pomace, citrus pomace, tomato pomace, carrot pomace all these a re obtained after extracting  
the juice and they can be appropriately mixed with various oil seed cakes or hulks and brand 
powders even brewers is printed g rain and sugar beet pulp and a ll these  things.  
So, this what is the level up mixing this can be optimized and they can be put to the extrusion  
technology added and fiber rich antioxidant like say that apple  pomace have very good health 
very good fiber prebiotic and fibe r and also there are many ant ioxidant etcetera. So, this can  be 
used for depression of antioxidant rich fiber rich or healthy s nack products ready to eat  product 
all this process parameter has impact in our laboratory also we  have worked and  ready to eat 
snacks using pea protein and combination of pea protein and app le pomace .  
 
Apple pomace composition 
 
In our country about 70-75% apple is consumed fresh from the fa rm and the remaining 25 to 
30% the processed and up to 25 to 305 which is processed it giv es around 25 to 30% pomace.  
So, the huge amount of pomace we are getting and it has a vario us valuable component. 
 
Manufacture of extruded products f rom apple and pineapple pomac e 
 
The manufacturer of various extruded products from the apple an d pineapple pomace, where 
various researchers have worked on ready to eat snack etc using  extrusion technology. Apple 
pomace can be taken and  other dry ingredients are fed into the  extruder where extruder 
conditions are  appropriately maintained i.e system parameter m aterial parameters etc are 
maintained and results into a good snack food. Thus, by varying  the combination of various 
ingredients extrusion  process parameter and even the die desig n; a variety of snacks can be 
obtained. One can get ready to  eat food extruded products eithe r from both pineapple pomace 
or apple pomace in various shape , various sizes having various values and they all can be used 
snack food as a healthy alternativ e for the snack food industry . 
 
 
Food waste composting 
The food waste can be used for extractions of bioactive, colori ng agents, additives etc are 
composed of many significant bio active agents and biochemicals ; or they can be converted into 
manure. The residue undergoes physical chemical and biological pre-treatment and then 
thermochemical conversion or biochemical conversion.  
It may include incineration, gasification, pyrolysis, microbial  fermentation or anaerobic 
digestion and it can be used in various product like biogas, bu tanol, hydrogen, bio ethanol, bio 
fertilizer, bioconversion, biofuel  which generates green energy . So, this will have a good impact 
on reducing the carbon footprint as well as at the same time we  can get very valuable product. 
 
.  
 
 
Bio-fertilizer production from processing waste 
The bio fertilizer products and from the processing waste like agro based biogas by burying 
waste with the various microorganisms, cyanobacteria etc and ni trogen fixing  microorganisms 
and fertilizer is used. So, even kitchen waste and other food p rocessing waste etcetera can be 
can be used for bio fertilizer products.  
 
Bioconversion & utilization of expired foods 
The bioconversion or utilization of the expire food can also be  done, for example probiotic 
beverage powder, onion and garlic powder have low self-life.  I f it is not consumed before 
expiry and products can be recalled. However, they can be conve rted into biofuel. Similarly, 
appropriate carbonaceous solid wh ich will be derived from resta urant food  waste etc can also 
be used. Then carbonation process and sulfonation process suita ble treatment can be given to 
them  and then they can be converted into biofuel.  
 
 
Valorisation of food waste to biofuel 
Then valorization of food waste into biofuel is a novel approac h in recycling of food  waste. 
Biofuel and bio ethanol can be prepared from edible biomass fro m food  waste. Biodiesel is 
produced due to presence of significant amount of lipids and  c arbohydrates. And this in fact 
can be more if only the lipid and the  carbohydrate can be used  for bio ethanol. 
 
There is a pictorial representa tion of overall process involved  in the production in biofuel  from 
the biomass can see that you can collect a biomass that collect ion hemicellouse, cellouse 
material, then it can be given pre-treatment and hydrolysis. Af ter that it can be  fermented into 
bio fuel, and also hydrogen product, one can again get various product like  g lucose i.e by 
enzymatic hydrolysis, or biomass, one can also get  β-glucoside as  and cellular various products.  
 
 
Conversion of food waste to biodiesel 
The production of biodiesel from food waste requires extraction  of lipids. Chemically, biodiesel 
is composed of fatty acid methyl esters (FAME). Biodiesel conta in both saturated & unsaturated 
fatty acid methyl esters which depends on source of feedstock. So, there is simultaneous 
production of bio-oil, bio ethanol, biodiesel from the food was te using chemical and bio 
catalytic methods.  By pyrolysis one can get bio-oil when subje cted to hydrolysis treatment. 
After hydrolysis and centrifugati on, the resultant product is c arbohydrate rich portion undergoes 
fermentation and convert into bio ethanol and lipid rich portio n convert into biodiesel. 
 
Then different extraction menthods can be used for extraction o f lipid from the waste or 
isolation and purific ation of liquid followed by the transester ification to produce biodiesel.  So,  
conventional extractions, solven t extraction and super critical  extraction is being applied. So, 
these are the 2 stages where the lipid can be extracted and the n these liquid can be characterized 
and then subjected to transesterif ication process. Here that is olation and purification, 
transesterification biodiesel a nd glycerol this can be used. 
 
Summary 
Sustainable and cost effective industrial valorisation of  food  wastes into high value added 
products has important economic and environmental benefits. Avo idance of food waste 
generation could be ideally obt ained by a proper equilibrium be tween food production and 
consumption. Tamarind kernel powder, jackfruit wastes and mango  kernel powder are the by-
products which can be effectivel y utilized.  Citrus fruit proce ssing, manufacture of pectin or 
pectin powder from orange peel and apple pomace and utilization  of extrusion in value addition 
should be focus. Food waste com posting, bio-fert ilizer producti on, valorisation of food waste 
to biofuel, etc. are the area n eeded to be focused for effectiv e waste utilization, 
 
 
These are the references used in this lecture.  Thank you very much. 
