1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing Fruits, Vegetables, Spic es and Plantation Crop 
Products 
Professor H N.Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture – 24 
Cut Fruits and Vegetables: Part I 
 
The concepts covered in this lecture are the fresh-cut produces , their manufacturing 
processes, quality changes dur ing processing, innovative or nov el technologies involved, and 
processing and desired qualities of popular fresh cut fruits an d vegetables which are available 
in the market.  
Fresh cut produce 
According to the International Fresh Cut Produce Association po pularly known as IFPA, “the 
fresh cut produces are any fruit or vegetable or combination th ereoff that has been physically 
altered from its original form, but  it remains in a fresh state ”.  
I n  t h e  r e c e n t  p a s t ,  c o n s u m p t i o n  o f  r e a d y - t o - e a t  f r e s h  c u t  f r u i t s has been substantially 
increased due to the increasing demand for low-calorie food pro ducts with fresh-like 
characteristics. Fresh cut produce may consist of peeled, slice d, shredded, trimmed and/or 
washed fruits or vegetables.  
 2 
 
 
 
Fresh cut products 
Fresh cut products includes any kind of fresh commodities and t heir mixtures in different cuts 
and it is packaged nicely. It may be fresh cut fruits, mixed fr esh cut fruits, fresh cut fruit-
salad, fresh cut vegetables, and items such as bagged salads, b aby carrots, stir fry vegetable 
mixes, fresh cut apples, pineapple or melon. These are some of the only few examples, the 
list is very large  and exhaustive.  3 
 
 
Fresh-cut fruits and vegetables manufacturing process 
In the market, variety of fresh-cut fruits and vegetables are a vailable nowadays. And 
particularly, in recent past, th ere has been increasing demand of these products, both at the 
consumer end and in the market. So, I tried to make you aware o f the manufacturing process 
for fresh-cuts fruits and vegetables.  
So, the first step was obviously  in the facility where these ar e produce are processed, so, their 
material either fruit or vegetable is to be received. Then at t he time of receiving, inspection, 
pre-cooling, cleaning, washing and disinfection are carried out . After this, the disinfected 
produce is sent next to the s econd step where sorting and gradi ng is done.  
Second step is very important a s the produce are sorted based o n size, grade, color, texture 
and other characteristics. Thi s will produce the cut pieces or cut slice etc. of desired or 
uniform size, uniform quality that will make it easier for furt her processing or handling or 
even from the shelf life and quality point of view. Then it is taken to the third step which 
involves peeling, then r emoval of core etc.  
In the third step, after the peeling and core removal, the prod uce is cut. Cutting may be done 
into the different shapes and sizes. After cutting, the next st ep is washing and sanitation. 
These cut pieces are properly washed and sanitized. There is a chance of contamination 
during cutting or other processes which invariably occurs. So, these cut pieces should be 
properly washed, sanitized and after that they are packaged. So , here in the fourth and fifth 
step, hurdle technology concept should be applied. There is was hing, sanitization and 
appropriate packaging should be done.  
There can be alternating hurdles such as thermal treatment, dip ping treatment or other 
treatments etc. should be done. The purpose is to make sure tha t the quality of the cut 4 
 produce is maintained, its texture, color, flavor can be mainta ined and also it has a 
comparatively desirable or long shelf life.  
 
Processing of fresh-cut produces 
The fresh-cut produce are the hub of nutrients and active compo nents. So, in order to get 
good quality or high quality cut produces, you have to have a g ood quality raw material and 
whole fresh and these as a influenced by diverse such as the pa rticular cultivar (genetics), 
climatic conditions, cultivation practices, growing locations, or maturity at the time of 
harvest.  
Then comes very important step i.e. pre-cooling. Peels provided  the natural protection to the 
whole fruits or vegetables. Thus, fresh-cut products should be pre-cooled as soon as possible 
after harvesting in order to extend their potential shelf-life.  When peels are removed, the rate 
of respiration increases. So, it becomes very important that al l these operations should be 
done in a controlled temperature environment and the temperatur e even during processing, 
after processing is maintained as low as possible. So, temperat ure is the most important factor 
influencing the quality of the fresh products. A low storage te mperature reduces respiration 
and ethylene production rates, t hereby delaying nutritional dec ay. So, it should be precooled 
before sending to the next treatment.  
The next stage is washing and sanitation. Fruits and vegetables  depending upon the 
horticultural practices, may be contaminated with a great diver sity of microflora, particularly, 
vegetables. Because of their proximity to the soil when they ar e produced and also they are 
low acid food, so they serve as a vector of majority of the spo ilage causing or pathogenic 
disease causing bacteria.  
 5 
 
 
So, washing and sanitization becomes very important i.e. it sho uld be properly disinfected 
because there may be chemical residue, pesticide residue, etc. The infestation commonly 
affect the quality, safety and shelf life of the end product, t hus disinfestation is needed. 
Washing is designed to remove any dirt, selected pesticides and  to detach microorganisms to 
enhance quality. Sanitization obv iously is the killing of conta minated microbes after washing. 
Sanitizers can reduce the growth  of natural microbial populatio n on the surface of fresh cut 
produces by 2-3 log units and therefore can reduce the contamin ation level, contamination of 
pathogens and extend the shelf life.  
 
Washing sanitizers and washing aids 
Ideal sanitisng agent should have following properties. They ha ve antimicrobial activity, they 
may have negligible effect on se nsory quality, they should be w ater-soluble and stable, and 
they should be environmentally capable and non-toxic. The commo nly used disinfectant and 6 
 sanitizers in the cut produces i nclude chlorine, chlorine dioxi de, organic acids, ozone, 
hydrogen peroxide, electrolyzed w ater, trisodium phosphates etc .  
 
Different disinfectants used for sanitizing fresh-cut produces 
The disinfectant which are used for sanitizing cut produces and  their labels are given like 
chlorine is generally used in the range of 100 to 150 ppm and t he pH range should be 6 to 7. 
Acidified sodium chlorite may be in between 500 to 1200 ppm wit h pH 2.5 to 2.9. Acidified 
electrolyzed water may be in the  range of 10 to 90 ppm, and pH is 2.1 to 4.5. These are some 
examples of disinfectants use d for sanitizing fresh cut produce s.  
 
Peeling/Cutting Operation 
The goal of the optimum peeling operation includes minimizing p roduct losses, types of 
products like potato products etc. Cutting is very important as  it optimum cutting minimizes 7 
 the heat ring formation in case of apples, potato; minimizes en ergy and chemical usage; 
minimizes the environmental pollutions.  
Peeling methods are categorized i nto five categories i.e. manua l peeling, mechanical peeling, 
chemical peeling, enzymatic peelin g, and thermal peeling. So, o ne has to adopt a specific 
method of peeling depending upon the  type of the material and i ts characteristics. 
The factors which influence the cutting operation include sharp ness of the cutting tool, types 
of size reduction (slicing, di cing, shredding), direction of cu tting (longitudinal or traverse), 
and geometric shape of the fres h cut fruits and vegetables (cub es, disc, baton etc.).  
The peeling and cutting operation should be properly maintained  a s  m o s t  f r u i t s  a r e  
susceptible to bruising and mech anical injury. Proper care shou ld be taken that during peeling 
and cutting operations, excessive damage is not there to the ti ssue. Otherwise, it will increase 
the rate of respiration. Fresh cut processing also removes the fruit’s natural cuticle or skin 
which is its natural protection against gas diffusion and micro bial invasion. So, it may 
increase the gas diffusion and microbial invasion etcetera. Lar g e  a n d  u s u a l l y  d a m a g e d  
surface area from peeling and cutting often provokes increased respiration, ethylene 
production and enhance susceptibility to water loss and a great er possibility of enzymatic and 
microbial deterioration.  
 8 
 
 
Dipping treatments 
The fresh produces are susceptible to various enzymes. During p eeling or immediately after 
peeling, the treatment like drippi ng or such other treatment ar e given to the commodity. 
Dipping treatments after peeling and/or cutting reduce microbia l loads and rinse tissue fluids, 
thus reducing enzymatic oxidati on during storage and the growth  of microorganisms. Fresh 
produce is dipped in antibrowning agents which may include asco rbate and calcium, thiol-
containing compounds, carboxylic acid, phenolic acid or even th e dipping solution may 
contain antimicrobial agents li ke chlorine, iodine, quaternary ammonium compounds, acidic 
compounds, ozone, hydrogen peroxide, etc. It may also include t exture agent or preservatives 
such as calcium treatment, edible coatings.  
 
 9 
  
Thermal treatment 
The dipping treatment may be followed by a heat shock like HTST  method which usually 
implies a washing step at a temperature ranging from 45 to 70 ° C for a few minutes, usually 
less than 5 minutes. Sometimes, depending upon the type of comm odity that is being 
processed, dipping treatment and heat shock needs to be combine d. The thermal treatment 
prevents the browning in fresh cut lettuces, improves organolep tic properties of vegetables, 
prevents quality deterioration, and maintains texture and color  quality. There is a necessity of 
combining this heat shock with a sanitizing method such as wash ing with chlorine or an 
alternative antimicrobial agent like calcium lactate.  
Blanching is a mild heat treatment, it may be steam blanching o r infrared radiation or 
electrical heating. So, a mild treatment can be used to inactiv ate microorganism or enzymes 
as well as appropriate dippi ng in the prepared solution. 
 
Dewatering/drying 
During the cutting operation, som e tissues are damaged. So, som e water may be oozing out 
and surface may contain somewhat moisture which will act as a v ector for microbial growth. 
So, they should be dried appropriately prior to packaging. Dryi ng is a good method for 
increasing the shelf life because an excess of water and the ti ssue fluids provides an excellent 
medium for microbial growth. This drying can be done within the  controlled heated air, or 
contact type dewatering (brushes , absorber rollers, PVC rollers ) or aerodynamic dewatering 
can be used.  10 
 
 
Novel technologies in fresh-cut fruits and vegetables productio n 
The novel technologies involved in the manufacture and processi ng of fresh-cuts and 
vegetables are UV-C irradiation, pulsed electric field (PEF), w ater jet cutting, active 
packaging, edible coating and many more. UV-C radiation is a no n-ionizing radiation in the 
wavelength from 100 to 280 nm. This light is used to maintain m icrobial quality, preserve 
hypersensitive tissues and to reduc e browning and injury of the  f r e s h - c u t  p r o d u c t s .  P E F  
consists in applying small pulses of electricity to inactivate the activity of microorganisms 
and enzymes. PEF conserves the quality of fresh cut produces an d avoids or reduces changes 
in sensory and physical propertie s of the foods. Water jet cutt ing can be used as it controls the 
pressure with a water barrier that prevents the movement of flu ids and flushes away the 
potentially damaging enzymes from the tissues. The purified wat er increases the quality of 
the fresh cut products with the absence of blades and knives th ereby reducing the possibility 
of microbial contamination and minimizes the oxidation.  
 11 
 The active packaging is a smart system that includes active ing redients like oxygen 
scavengers, carbon dioxide absorbers, ethylene absorbers, etc. The most applied active 
packaging for fresh-cut fruits and vegetables consists of antim icrobial and antioxidant 
activity because fresh cut produces are more likely to be attac ked by the microorganism or 
oxidative changes. The applicati on of garlic essential oil enca psulated in cyclodexrtin were 
found effective against Alternaria sp.  and it increased the the shelf life of fresh-cut tomatoes. 
Similarly, edible coating consists  of using an edible substance  applied as a film or the surface 
of the cut produces and it preven ts the product from their wate r loss and assist to retain 
nutrients as well as reduce the microbial spoilage.  
 
Quality changes of fresh-cut produce 
Quality is a very important aspect as fruits and vegetables the y are very susceptible to the 
microbial growth, biochemical reactions, mechanical damage, phy siological aging, etc. The 
quality of fresh-cut fruit and vegetable products is a combinat ion of attributes,                        
properties, or characteristics th at determine their value to th e consumer. So, proper care has 
to be taken for appearance, textu re, flavor, nutritive value an d safety aspects of the cut fruits 
and vegetables.  
Appearance 
The appearance of the commodity i .e. including color, gloss, sh ape, size and absence of 
defects, and decay, is the main factor which influences the con sumers’ choice. Browning is 
caused by the interaction of the enzyme polyphenol oxidase (PPO ) with the phenols released 
during minimally processing. So, during the processing of the f resh cut produce, tissue 
damages occurs by cutting and it facilitates br owning reaction by increasing the ethylene 
production and respiration.  
 12 
 
 
There are a group of complex r eactions involved where phenyl al anine ammonia lyase (PAL) 
and polyphenol oxidase (PPO) enzymes are added, complex organic  compounds are formed 
which gives the brown color and c auses undesirable flavor in th e cut produces.  
 
Browning in fresh-cut tropical fruits 
Browning in the fresh cut tropical fruits is shown by Sommano e t al. (2020). The sample 
number 1 (fresh guava) and 2 (fresh raw mango) after minimal pr ocessing where (a) is fresh 
cut slices, and (b-c) is slices  kept at 30 °C f or 5 and 20 h, r espectively. The slices were placed 
in a polypropylene box and left at 30 °C for 5 (d) and 20 h (e)  and 5 °C for 5 and 20 h (f-g). 
You can see the visible changes in  the color and the browning i s visible. In the third figure, it 
is the fresh ripe mango and the similar treatment was provided.  At higher temperature and 
where there is no packaging, the browning is more in both the f resh guava, fresh raw mango, 
fresh ripe mango.  13 
 
 
Texture  
Texture is a critical quality attribute that helps both the ind ustry and consumer determine the 
acceptability of food. Fresh cut fruits and vegetables with bet ter maintenance in firmness, 
crispiness, and crunchy texture are highly desired by the consu mers due to their close 
association with tissue deterioration. The loss of firmness, is  particularly associated with 
enzymatic degradation of pectins catalyzed by pectin methyl est erase (PME) and 
polygalacturonase (PG). In the fi gure, maturation, ripening and  melting is given in x-axis and 
firmness is provided in y-axis. At the time of maturation, it i s the pectic substances fruit, it is 
in optimum firmness. After it ripens, there are particularly ch anges in the pectic substances 
may be depolymerization of hemi cellulose, desterification of pe ctin, solubilization of pectin 
or depolymerization of pectin, due to the reaction of polymethy l pectin, polymethyl enzymes 
etc., causing softening of the tissues. So, during the manufact uring of cut fruits and 
vegetables, appropriate care should be taken such as dipping an d other methods discussed 
earlier to manitain the firmness.   
Flavour 
Flavour involves tastes like sweet , sour, astringent, bitter; a roma and off-flavours. The 
specific flavour of fresh-cut produces depends upon the product  composition, its genetic 
factors, maturity, and post-harvest treatment. Fruit aroma is c haracterized by a high content 
of volatile oils and aliphatic esters, which have a higher thre shold of perception, compared to 
volatiles responsible for vegetab le aroma, which are mainly nit rogen and sulphur compounds. 
Environmental conditions should be  properly maintained as it ma y result in the changes in 
this flavor compound.  14 
 
 
The factors affecting the flavour quality of fresh cut vegetabl es are browning, changes in 
microenvironment, microbial growth, conversion of starch to sug ar or vice-versa. Browning 
may cause astringency, reduction in extinction; changes in the microenvironment in the 
produce may result in the ferment ative flavor such as sour tast e and alcoholic smell; 
microbial growth may result in the putrid smell, sour taste, an d rot smell; conversion of starch 
to sugar or sugar to starch as the case may result in the incre asiness in the sweetness of 
carrots or there is a sugars in the tender peas, sugar is conve rted into starch after dryness then 
the it reduces the sweetness.  
Nutritional/health aspects  
The fruits and vegetables are major source of essential dietary  nutrients such as vitamins and 
minerals, as well as a good source of fiber and carbohydrates a nd healthy bioactives. So, 
polyphenols such as anthocyanins, flavonoids, phenolic acids, e tc. are the most important 
component present in fruits and v egetables. They are an integra l part of diets and are assumed 
to be beneficial for human hea lth due to their biological activ ities, including an tioxidant, anti-
inflammatory, antibacterial, and antiviral functions. WHO in 20 03 recommended minimum 
consumption of around 400 g of fru its and vegetables per day.  
 15 
 
 
 
Safety aspects 
The fresh cut fruits and vegetables are susceptible to microbia l attacks due to processes used 
in its preparation such as peeling, cutting, slicing, etc. Micr obial contamination can occur in 
one or more procedures during ha rvesting, processing, packaging , preservation, 
transportation and distribution. Thus, proper care should be ta ken so as to maintain the safety 
of fresh-cut produces.  
In leafy vegetables, physiological reactions dominate whereas i n the sugar cane, sugar rich 
vegetables and fruits, microbiological spoilage may dominate. S o, proper management of the 
temperature, gas concentr ation etc. should be taken.  16 
 
 
Possible pathogenic contaminat ion in fresh cut vegetables 
In the fresh cut produces, espec ially vegetables, chances of pa thogenic contamination is very 
high because they are low pH commodities. For example, pathogen ic contamination like 
Clostridium botulinum  in shredded cabbage, cubed bu tternut squash, sliced onions. 
Salmonella sp.  in chopped or sliced tomatoes, Listeria monocytogenes  in cabbage salad, 
asparagus, broccoli. Parasites like Cryptosporidium spp.  may be found in lettuce and onions. 
So, these, the fresh cut, particularly vegetables, they are ver y prone to a contamination with 
the pathogenic disease producing microorganism bacteria. So, th is should be properly taken 
care of.  
Quality changes of fresh c ut fruits and vegetables 
The beneficial atmosphere i.e. O 2 and CO 2 concentration helps to keep the fresh cut fruits and 
vegetables from degradation, for example, in apple slices, brow ning is the main cause of 
deterioration. So, it should be pr operly packed and atmosphere inside the packet should be 
maintained as less than 1 % O 2. Similarly, in broccoli, if the fluorets set broccoli yellowin g or 
off odours is the main cause of degradation and here in the pac ket in the environment where 
it is stored after production, it should be having 3 to 10 % O 2 or 5 to 20 % CO 2. In sliced 
cucumber, leakage is the main cause of degradation. So, it can be kept in an airtight package 
and there should be no leakage of the gaseous environment. In s liced or topped strawberry, 
loss of texture, juice, color is the major cause of degradation  which can be prevented by 
maintaining 1 to 2 % O 2 and 5 to 12 % CO 2 in the commodity.  17 
 
 
 
Similarly, here in sliced or dr ied onion bulb, texture, juice l oss, discoloration is the major 
cause of degradation which can be controlled with 2 to 5 % O 2 and 10 to 15 % CO 2. In 
pomegranate arils, color loss, or juice leakage is the major ca use. So, about 21 % O 2 and 15 
to 20 % CO 2 may help in extending its shelf life and maintaining its quali ty. In sliced tomato, 
leakage to the environment is major problem which can be reduce d by 3 % O 2 and 3 % CO 2 
for maintaining the shelf lif e of cut sliced tomatoes.  18 
 
 
Processing steps and desired qua lities of fresh-cut produces 
The fruit and their method for preparation of fresh-cut produce  has been discussed. The 
commercial ripening stage for freshcut papaya is usually when i ts surface is 60 to 70 % 
yellow in colour. Thus, knife is used for slicing and cutting o f papaya, which was sanitized 
b e f o r e  u s e  w i t h  1 5 0  µ L / L  f r e e  c h l orine and the whole fruit is t hen peeled, halved 
longitudinally and seeds are removed. 
Similarly, in mango, there is a commercial ripening stage i.e.  colour break, shoulders 
developed, and/or shoulder bloom , should be chosen. It should b e chosen properly, proper 
quality or grade. The selected clean fruits are peeled thorough ly to remove all visible veins 
and browning followed by submerging it in the clean water for 5  minutes and then cut and 
sliced.  
Whole undamaged watermelons are c leaned and dipped into 10 µL/L  sodium hypochlorite 
solution having pH of 6.5 approximately. The fruit is sliced la titudinaly, cut simultaneously 
from the center of the fruit into 2.5 to 4 cm wide rings and ea ch ring is then processed into 6 
equally sized wedge-shaped slices.  
Jackfruit i.e. after cleaning in the acidified hydrochlorite so lution, whole jackfruit is cut 
manually with sanitized stainless steel knives. The peel and no n-edible latex parts are 
removed and the edible part is cut into small sizes of 4 x 3 x 2 cm and these slices may be 
dipped in chilled chlorinated water (30 ppm) for 5 minutes for sanitization and then packaged 
appropriately.  19 
 
 
 
In red beet whether grated, cube d, or whole peeled. They should  be stored at around 1 to 3 °C 
before and after processing. Respiration is slighly reduced dur ing storage in 5 % O 2 and 5 % 
CO 2. Broccoli is washed in water containing up to 200 µL/L total c hlorine to wash the 
residual material from the florets as well as to reduce the aer obic plate count. Fresh-cut 
broccoli florets should be tight, firm, turgid, and dark green without blooming buds. There 
should be no sulphur odour or discol oration along the stems and  the cut ends.  20 
 
 
Fresh cut cabbage whether it is diced and shredded products dep ending on cutting. They are 
cut with the varying sizes from 0.63 cm to 0.95 cm. Heads are t rimmed to remove wrapper 
leaves and cored, cut and washed using chlorinated water (100 µ L/L of total chlorine) for 
about 1 minute before being spun- dried and then packaged.  
The fresh-cut carrots include the whole peeled (baby), sticks, slices, shredded, grated, and 
diced. The stems and tips are ex cised and the trimmed carrots a re peeled, cut and washed in 
100 µL/L sodium hypochlorite solution for the less than 1 min f ollowed by centrifugation for 
the removal of surface water.  
 
Whole onion are peeled and trimmed by machine or hand, then was hed with chlorinated 
water before and after processing for sanitization purpose. The  bulbs of onion rings are 
washed with cold water at around 0 °C before processing. Fresh- cut onions should have no 21 
 discoloration, skin and core. B ulbs should be dry, free of deca y, firm, and they may be about 
7.5 to 10 cm in diameter.  
Fresh cut potatoes (sticks, di ced, sliced, or peeled) should be  firm and without brown 
discoloration. Hand peeling and lye peeling result in good qual ity, although abrasion peeling 
is more common in the freshed potatoes. However, it is not reco mmended for making cut 
potato, diced potato. An antibro wning dips such as 0.5 % L-cyst eine, 2 % citrate, 4 % 
ascorbate, 1 % citrate, 1 % sodium pyrophosphate or even 1 to 2  % brine solution in 
combination with modified atmospheric packaging (MAP) are neede d to prevent the 
browning of the peeled potatoes as browning occurs very fast in  them. 
 
Summary 
The market for ready-to-eat fruit s and vegetables is growing at  a rapid rate. Fresh cut fruits 
and vegetables present unique physiological opportunity in the market. But at the same time, 
maintaining the quality, freshness and shelf life in the fresh cut fruits and vegetables is a 
challenge. Because the physiological and other biochemical reac tions are there. So, 
appropriate care such as anti-e nzymatic or anti-browning, antim icrobial steps, either by 
dipping or blanching, appropriate  packaging and edible coating,  etc. operations need to be 
taken cae of. Moreever, this s hould be done at lower temperatur e. In the supply chain 
management, the low temperature should be maintained in both th e supply chain as well as 
storage. The quality attributes such as appearance, texture, fl avour, nutritive values and 
microbiological quality of the fresh cut produce needs to be ma intained for consumer 
acceptability.   22 
 
 
These are the references  for further study. Thank you. 