1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N MISHRA 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 22 
Hurdle Technology Concepts 
 
The concepts in this lecture covers various aspects of hurdle t echnology, types and effects of 
hurdles, effects of certain hurdl es or microorganisms, non-ther mal hurdle techniques, and 
effects of hurdle on product quality.  
 
Hurdle technology 
 2 
 Hurdle technology is the combined use of several preservation m ethods to make a product 
shelf-stable, to improve quality and to provide additional safe ty. It is also known as 
“combined method technology”. The spoilage and pathogenic micro organisms have to pass 
through these individual approaches called “hurdles” for mainta ining their activity in food 
products. 
Hurdle technology has arisen in response to a number of develop ments. Now, consumer 
demands for healthier foods that retain the original nutritiona l properties, there is a shift to 
ready to eat and convenience foods, which require little furthe r processing by the consumers 
and consumers preference for more natural foods, which require less processing and fewer 
chemical preservatives. So, these  are the drivers for the hurdl e technology. 
 
Principles of hurdle technology 
Preservative factors or hurdles d isturb the homeostasis of micr oorganisms. Microorganisms 
are not able to “jump over” all the hurdles present in the food  product. Preservative factors 
prevents microorganisms from mu ltiplying and causing them to re main inactive or even die. 
The hurdle concept illustrates that complex interactions of tem perature, water activity,       
pH, etc. are significant to t he microbial stability. 
The advantages of hurdle concepts are that it can avoid the sev e r i t y  o f  o n e  f a c t o r  f o r  
preservation, combination factor s act synergistically, hurdle a t lower concentrations prevents 
undesired side effects, lowers pr oduction cost and saves energy . Using natural preservatives 
in combination with synthetic preservatives, HT foods remain st able and safe even without 
refrigeration. 3 
 
 
 
Types of hurdle s 
Physical:  High temperature (b lanching, pasteurization, baking) , Low temperature (chilling, 
freezing), Electromagnetic energy (microwave, radiation), Packa ging (active and vacuum 
packaging, edible film), and so on. 
Physicochemical: CO 2, O 2, O 3, Ethanol, Lactic acid, Low pH, Low a w, Low redox potential, 
Organic acids, Phenols, Salt, S moking, Sodium nitrite/nitrate, Sodium / Potassium sulphites,  
Spices & herbs. 
No-thermal: High hydrostatic pre ssure, Pulsed electric field, P ulsed light, and so on. 
Microbiological: Competitive flora, Protective cultures, Microb ial products. 4 
 
 
Aspects of hurdle technology 
Food preservation depends on unfa vorable environmental conditio ns to inhibit microbial 
growth, shorten their survival, or cause death. The designed hu rdle will either kill the 
microbes/pathogens or supress their growth. Hurdle technique ta rgets the physiological 
aspects of microorganism. This process involves four major mech anisms to kill or delay the 
growth of the microorganism, which include homeostasis, metabol ic exhaustion or auto 
sterilization, stress reacti on and multi target preservation of  food. 
 
Homeostasis  
Homeostasis is the tendency to m aintain uniformity and stabilit y in the internal microbial 
cells. Once the homeostasis causing microorganism disturbance t hrough the incorporation of 
hurdles, then the microbial spoilage will either be delayed or microorganism will be killed. 
The table shows the several stress factors and their homeostati c response of microbial cells. 
For example, low level of nutrients may cause low level of meta bolism, stationary phase, 5 
 viable nonculturable forms; lower water activity is may cause o smoregulation, accumulation 
of solutes, reduction of water loss or maintenance of membrane turgor. Raising levels of 
oxygen may result in the enzyme protection life production of c atalase, peroxidase, super 
oxide dismutase from hydrogen peroxide and oxygen derived free radicals. Low water 
activity or even a low pH it may result into the removal of pro tons from the cell maintenance 
of the pH gradient. Similarly, ionizing radiation may result in  repair of single strand breaks in 
DNA.  
 
Metabolic exhaustion or auto-sterilization 
In hurdle-treated products, micr obes used energy in maintaining  their homoeostasis. In the 
end, microbes will be metabolically exhausted and eventually di e due to starvation. This 
process is called auto-steriliz ation. Auto-steri lization provid es foods safety against pathogens 
and spoilers during storage mostly at room temperature. 
 
Stress reaction   6 
 The stress reaction has been observed in microbes when they are  under stress due to food 
shortage. Microbes become more re sistant under the stress as th ey release stress shock 
proteins. The rate of formation of stress shock proteins depend s on the pH, water activity, 
ethanol, and heat. The synthesi s of shock proteins becomes diff icult when more hurdles are 
introduced at same time and it lead to metabolic exhaustion of microbes. 
 
Multitarget preservation of food 
The combination of different hu rdles such as pH, aw, Eh, etc. a ct synergistically on the cell of 
microorganism. The synergistic e ffect of hurdles disturbs the h omeostasis of microbes and 
reduces the synthesis of stress shock proteins. Simultaneous ex posure of microorganisms to 
different stresses will sharply reduce energy of microbial cell s .  T h e  s y n e r g i s t i c  e f f e c t  o f  
different preservative factors (hurdles) with small intensity i s more effective on 
microorganisms than one preserva tive factor of larger intensity . 
 
 7 
 Effect of hurdles 
The image no. 1 represents a food that contains five hurdles, a nd these are high temperature 
(T value), low temperature (t va lue), aw, acidity (pH), and pre servatives. The microorganisms 
overcome these hurdles, and the food is not microbiologically s table and safe. Additional or 
higher hurdles are needed to ensu re product stability. The imag e no. 2 represents four hurdles 
are sufficient to inhibit the microorganisms associated with a different food product. Some of 
the microorganisms present can overcome three hurdles but none can jump over aw                        
hurdle used together. Thus, the food is stable and safe with fo ur hurdles. The image no. 3 
represents many undesirable microorganisms are present initiall y in the food due to poor 
hygienic conditions in processing or handling of foods. The usu al sets of hurdles on a product 
are unable to prevent food spoilage or food poisoning, so addit ional or higher intensities of 
hurdles are needed.  
 
The image no. 4 signifies that if there are only a few microorg anisms at the start of food 
processing and preservation, a fe w or low intensities of hurdle s are sufficient to inhibit 
microorganisms. The sanitation and aseptic processing of perish able foods is based on this 
principle. The image no. 5 represents that the product microbia l stability is based on different 
intensities of hurdles. In this product, the main hurdles are “ t” and aw, whereas the others are 
less important hurdles. The image no. 6 represents that it illu strates the behavior of bacterial 
spores in food products while inactivating vegetative cells of bacteria by heat treatment.  The 
vegetative cells germinate from spores during processing or sto rage period and therefore are 
not inhibited by three hurdles  but are inhibited by low pH. 8 
 
 
The image no. 7 illustrates the sequence of hurdles in fermente d vegetables. Preservatives 
(p): Inhibit many of the bacteria, Competitive flora (c.f.): Mu ltiply, using oxygen (O 2), and 
reduce the redox potential  (Eh) of the product, E h hurdle:  Inhibits aerobic microorganisms 
and favors the selection of lactic  acid bacteria (LAB), pH: LAB  decrease the pH value of 
product, a w: Osmoregulation. The image no. 8 shows the possible synergisti c effect of 
hurdles, which probably is relate d to a multi-target disturbanc e of the homeostasis of 
microorganisms in foods. 
 
Effect of certain hurdles on m icrobial cell hydrolysis 
Water activity 
Water activity effect on majority of microorganisms are related  to the water status. 
Microorganisms are metabolically active only in a certain range  of water activities. 
Microorganisms do not contain water-impermeable barriers and te nd rapidly into osmotic 
equilibrium with their surroundings. At reduced a w, the osmolality of the environment will be 9 
 high and the solutes present cannot penetrate the cell membrane ; the microorganisms lose 
water. The loss of water results in a reduced metabolic activit y and, at least temporarily, 
growth ceases, affecting the homeostasis of the cell. 
 
Food pH 
pH is a principal factor that de termine the survival and growth  of microorganisms in food. 
The microflora is affected by fr ee [H+] & concentration of undi ssociated weak acids. Weak 
acids cause leakage of H+ across the cell membrane, acidifying the cell interior and inhibiting 
transport mechanisms. Growth inhibition can in principle be cau sed by interference with cell 
membrane, metabolic enzymes, protein synthesis system or geneti c  m a t e r i a l .  I n  a  m i x e d  
initial flora, the acidity and pH of the food may determine the  potential spoilage 
microorganisms. 
 
Increased acidity  10 
 Acidity slows down the growth of spoilage organisms and pathoge ns. Pathogens won’t grow 
and spores won’t germinate at  pH < 4.5 (e.g. Fruit juices & sau erkraut). 
Preservatives 
Preservatives inhibit bacteria, yeasts and molds, used at low l evels (mg/kg) for specific 
applications, e.g. Benzoate in s oft drinks, sulfites in wines, ascorbates in juices, etc. 
 
Blanching 
An early processing step for dest ruction of contaminating organ isms. The water activity and 
pH hurdles, with blanching step  reduces initial microbial count , disturb the homeostatis & 
assure microbial stability. Decrease in the viable numbers occu r during the a w, pH & 
preservatives equilibrium stage in which the blanched food is e xposed; called as auto -
sterilization process of stabl e hurdle technology foods. Microo rganisms exert every possible 
repair mechanism to overcome hostile environment; thus they com pletely use up energy and 
die by becoming “metabolically exhausted”. The HT processed fru its are microbiologically 
stable in non-refrigerated s torage for 3 to 8 months.  11 
 
 
Non-thermal methods as hurdles 
High hydrostatic pressure 
Commercial pasteurization or ste rilization of low-acid foods us ing high pressure is difficult 
without additional factors. Heat, antimicrobials, ultrasound, a nd ionizing radiation are 
combined with high pressure to accelerate rate of inactivation.  Antimicrobial effect of high 
pressure increases with heat, low pH, carbon dioxide, organic a cids, and bacteriocins such as 
nisin. Combination with acetic, be nzoic, or sorbic acids; sulfi tes, polyphenols, and chitosan 
allow lower processing conditions. 
 
Pulsed electric field 
High intensity PEF causes changes in the cell membrane due to a n electromechanical 
instability. Combination of heat, lysozyme & high intensity PEF  are potential alternative for 
the heat sterilization. Possible synergistic effect along with pH & ionic strength result in the 12 
 inactivation of Escherichia coli at 10 to 15 °C. The electric f ield and ionic strength are related 
to the poration rate and physical damage of the cell membranes.  Increase in the field intensity 
and number of pulses increase the  extent of inactivation. pH ch anges the cytoplasmic 
conditions due to the osmotic imbalance caused by poration. Com bination of pH, ionic 
strength, temperature, and antim icrobial agents offer great pro mise as non-thermal hurdles. 
 
Pulsed light 
Few flashes applied in a fraction of a second of intense pulses  of broad spectrum light 
(ultraviolet to the near infrared region) having the wavelength : 200 to 1100 nm, and pulse 
duration: 1 µs to 0.1 s. The mechanism behind this is the damag e to DNA and destruction to 
the cellular components by the high peak power and the photothe rmal effects of visible and 
near infrared portions of the flash spectrum. The critical para meters are light characteristics 
(spectrum, intensity, duration, and number of pulses), homogene ity of the flow pattern and 
the radiation field, and packaging and type, transparency and c olor of food. The advantages 
are very short treatment time, little effect on colour, texture , antioxidant, sensory properties at 
low dose. The disadvantages of this process are the low penetra tion in solids and opaque 
juices, thermal damage at  high doses, and browning and dehydrat ion of cut fruit surfaces.  13 
 
 
Ultrasound 
Injury or disrupting microorganisms by high energy ultrasound w aves of 20 kHz or more                        
due to cavitation. Disruption of cellular structure (wall membr ane, organelles) and cell lysis 
attributed to cavitation. The cr itical parameters are power and  amplitude of ultrasonic waves, 
exposure time, volume and composition of the food to be process ed, temperature of treatment 
and critical parameters of procedures used in combination. It c auses inactivation pf enzymes 
when combined with heat and pressure, and has little effect on colour of juices and cut fruits, 
but it requires a high energy consumption, and causes undesirab le sensory changes and skin 
ruptures in berries  at high doses.  
 
These graphs show the semi logarithmic plots for (a) semilogari thmic survival curves of 
Listeria monocytogenes  and (b) Saccharomyces cerevisiae  in clarified apple juice. The 
combined US treatment and UV-C li ght treatment is effective in reducing the microbial load. 14 
 
 
I n  t h e s e  f i g u r e s  ( A )  a n d  ( B )  u s e  a n  e x t e r n a l  c i r c u l a t o r  w a t e r  b ath or immersion in an 
ultrasound bath for discontinuous thermosonication while (C) ma kes use of a temperature 
controlled flow cell that inc ludes a sonicator probe. 
 
Manosonication 
At room temperature, manosonication is viable because static pr essure quadruples the lethal 
effect of ultrasound. Inactivation rate increases with pressure  due to increased bubble 
implosion intensity. Faster bacterial inactivation could be ach ieved if ultrasonic waves and 
heat were used together under pressure. As shown in figure, ast axanthin is produced with a 
culture media and inoculum, followed by centrifugation. Then th e supernatant is taken off 
and the biomass is added with buffer of pH 7.0 and thoroughly m ixed. The cell suspension is 
put into the manosonication chamber, where liquid nitrogen gas is purgerd into it with the 
application of pressu re. After centrifugati on, the cell debris are removed.  15 
 
 
Mano-thermo-sonication 
Combination of low pressure (0.3 MPa), mild heat treatment, and  ultrasonic wave treatment, 
for inactivation of microorganisms. Inactivation of peroxidase,  lipoxygenase, and polyphenol 
oxidase by mano-thermo-sonication is reported. Synergistic effe ct, reduce enzyme resistance 
& heat treatment required for inactivation. Processing of juice s and other drinks to solve 
problems caused by thermostable enzymes. More research is neede d to clarify the 
mechanisms responsible for the  observed enzyme inactivation und er this new technique.  
 
Osmodehydrofreezing 
Combined process in which osmotic dehydration is followed by ai r dehydration and freezing. 
Fresh like reduced-moisture vegetable ingredients free of prese rvatives. Osmotic 
concentration followed by air drying using the hurdle technolog y as an alternative to 
traditional drying Advantage of the porous microstructure and i ncreasing                        
water transfer rate. 16 
 
 
Antimicrobial packaging 
Antimicrobial packaging is able to kill or inhibit putrefying a nd pathogenic microorganisms 
that contaminate foods. Antimicrobial functions are achieved by  adding antimicrobial agents 
in packaging system or using antimicrobial polymeric materials.  It allows the migration of 
antimicrobial agents   into foods or headspace inside packages,  and inhibits the growth of 
microorganisms, removes essential factors of microbial growth f rom the food systems and 
inhibits the growth of microorga nisms, and does not release ant imicrobial                        
agents but suppresses the growth of microorganisms at the conta ct surface. 
In this table, some studies showing the use of hurdle technolog y in preservation of plant 
foods are discussed. For example, heating for 70 ᵒC for 10 minutes with the addition of 200 
ppm potassium metabisulfite can extend the shelf life of juices  blend made from radish and 
sugarcane by three months under refrigeration conditions.   
 
Effects of hurdle on food quality 17 
 Hurdles can influence the stability, safety, sensory, nutritive , technological, and economic 
properties of a product, since the hurdles might be negative or  positive for the total quality of 
a food depending on intensity of hurdles. Some hurdles may infl uence the safety as well as 
the quality of foods, due to antimicrobial properties and abili ty to improve the flavor of the 
products. Low temperature (chilling), sometimes, may be detrime ntal to fruit quality 
(“chilling injury”), while moderate chilling is beneficial for inhibiting the microbial growth 
and extending shelf life. pH of fermented foods should be low e nough to inhibit pathogenic 
bacteria, but low pH may impair taste. If the intensity of a hu rdle in a food is too small, it 
should be strengthened; on the other hand, if it is detrimental  to the total food quality, it 
should be lowered and additional hurdle must be considered. Adj ustment of the hurdles in 
foods should be used in the optim um range depending on the qual ity of foods. 
 
In summary, the hurdle technology  targets physiological aspects  of microorganisms that 
involves homeostasis, metabolic exhaustion or auto-sterilizatio n, stress reaction, multi target 
preservation of food. Non therma l techniques such as HPP, PEF, pulsed light and ultrasound 
showed significant role in preservation of foods, however, more  research need to covert the 
lab scale techniques to commercial scale. Antimicrobial packagi ng system in comparison to 
conventional packaging provide a dditional hurdle in the form of  antimicrobial agents. Use of 
combination of different techniques improves inactivation rates  of microbes and enzymes. 
Use of hurdle technology make possible to supply fresh, nutriti ous, and convenient                   
foods to the consumer. 18 
 
 
These are the references  for further study. Thank you.  
 