1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H. N. Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 49 
Carbonated Fruit Juices and Premixes 
 
 
This lecture discusses about carbonated fruit juices and pre mi xes. The topics, which will be 
discussed include carbonation, process of carbonation, reason f or carbonation etc. De-
aerators and carbonators will also be discussed. Then soft drin ks and their compositions, fruit 
material and nutraceutical as ing redients in these beverages, p rocess for the preparation of 
carbonated fruit beverages will a lso be discussed. Finally, one  case study i.e., the carbonated 
aonla beverage premix will be discussed.  2 
 
 
Carbonation 
It is a process to dissolve a quantity of carbonic gas into dif ferent products. The products 
maybe water, wine, juices, soft drinks, etc. The purpose here i s to obtain a gasified or 
carbonated final product. When dissolved in water, CO 2 is sparingly soluble, and thus, it is 
slowly released and forms bubble that provides a characteristic  mouthfeel and unique taste, 
when these carbonated beverages are consumed or carbonated prod ucts are consumed.  
Benefits 
The benefits of carbonation includ e that it helps to protect th e aroma and color as well as to 
increase the tasting smell. Under suitable conditions, CO 2 has a preserving property. It 
inhibits the development of harmful aerobic microorganisms. Dri nking carbonated cola 
drinks may harm bone health, but p lain sparkling water appears to have a neutral or positive 
effect. A carbonated drink may even enhance digestion by improv ing swallowing ability and 
reducing constipation. 
 
Why CO 2?  
The CO 2 gas content is one of the smallest constituents by weight (7 g /l), but possibly the 
most important, in regards to palatability of the product. CO 2 is one of the very few gases, 
which is suitable for providing the effervescence in soft drink s. CO 2 is a non-toxic gas. It is 
inert, tasteless, and it allows f or convenient bulk transportat ion and storage.  3 
 
 
Types of carbonation 
Carbonation results from the impregnation of a liquid/solid wit h CO 2 gas to form carbonic 
acid. The CO 2 was traditionally obtained from the lime kilns i.e., by hittin g the calcium 
carbonate. The calcium carbonate is heated, the CO 2 gas is generated, and this is collected 
and this can be then used for the carbonation of the beverage. Now, it has been replaced by 
the CO 2 stored in pressurized insulated  tanks, which are kept at a ver y low temperature. Even 
for the use in the juice powders, a carbonation powder premix c an be formulated and 
developed from the mixture of acids such as citric acid, tartar ic acid, and base component, 
which is sodium bicarbonate and this carbonation mixture or car bonation powder can be 
mixed with the fruit juice powder etc. and when it will dissolv e, it will give the CO 2 g a s  
effect in the beverage.  
 
Carbonators  
Carbonator combines CO 2 gas with the liquid to be carbona ted. Carbonators are classifi ed 
into two categories, one which i s used to carbonate water only and the other is to carbonate 
the finished product (syrup-wate r mixture). Depending upon the specific beverage being 
produced, the carbonator is regulat ed so that the water will co ntain or beverage will contain 
about 1 to 5 volumes of gas. A volume of gas is equivalent to 1 5 psi pressure at sea level and 
at 15 °C temperature. Soft drinks may, accordingly, contain 15 to 75 psi gas pressure.  4 
 
 
Need for De-aerator during carbonation 
Beer, cider, and wine have naturally dissolved CO 2 in them, that only need is to a boost of 
CO 2 when carbonating. Soft drinks and water are different. Water i s naturally rich in 
atmospheric oxygen, which needs to be removed before the CO 2 is added into it. Otherwise, 
the water will not be saturated correctly and will reject the C O2, causing the water or drink to 
go flat.  
Moreover, immediately as a bottle is opened, the fizz will disp erse rapidly if oxygen is 
present, causing the water to drink to go flat. For this reason , before carbonating water for 
preparation of carbonated soft drinks, it is necessary to use a  separate addition to the 
carbonating unit, called a De- aerator to remove the oxygen from  the beverage.  
 
How to measure carbonation? 
Carbonation is measured as either ‘volume’ or grams per liter. One volume means 1 L of CO 2 
in 1 liter of drink i.e., 1.96 about approximately 2 g/L. Most carbonated drinks contain 3 to 4 
volumes (6 – 8 g/L) CO 2. Carbonation is usually determi ned by measuring the pressure i n the 
container at a known temperature.  The pressure inside a contain er depends on the level of the 
dissolved CO 2 and the temperature. The solubility of the CO 2 in the liquid depends upon the 
pressure and the temperature of the liquid while it is being st erilized or while it is being 
carbonated. The standard instrument used by the soft drink indu stry, for the measurement of 
carbonation is a Zahm CO 2 tester. It can be seen in the figure. Another method is ‘snift ’ 
method, where the pressure is re leased initially i.e., snifted to flush air out of the headspace. 
The pack is then shaken and the maximum pressure is noted. Colo urimetric methods are also 5 
 available but they are not used as they are prone to interferen ce in strongly coloured soft 
drinks. The color of the beverag e may interfere with the measur ement. 
 
FSSAI guidelines for carbo nated fruit-based drinks 
FSSAI has finalized the standard s for carbonated  fruit juices a nd fruit drinks i n the year 2011. 
Those are given in the table. In 2016, to enhance the carbonate d fruit drinks, FSSAI added 
another type of formulation. They  revised their earlier guideli nes. As per the guideline, as per 
the 2011 regulations, total solubl e solids (m/m) should not be less than 10%. But it is not 
applicable as per the modified  regulations of 2016. Fruit conte nt (m/m) in the beverage 
should not be less than 10% as per the earlier regulations. In the 2016, it was, if less than 
10%. Lemon or lemon content not less than 5% by earlier regulat ions of 2011 and not less 
than 2.5% in the modified regulations. Other fruits not less th an 10% as per the 2011 
regulations and not less than 5% a s per the 2016 regulations.  
 
Carbonated beverage ingredients 
In the table, the ingredients in a carbonated beverage are give n. In case of sparkling water, 
where in the water, only sodium bicarbonate in the concentratio ns of 300 to 400 ppm, is 
added and it has no color, no acid is added into it and CO 2 volume of gas is around 4 to 5. In 
the ginger ale, the flavoring component is ginger root, oil, an d lime oil. The color is caramel. 
Citric acid is the preservative, which is used and volume of th e gas is around 3. In the orange 6 
 beverages, oil of orange and orange juice are normally used as flavorings and then tartrazine 
for coloring purposes and citric acid. The carbon dioxide volum e is 1.5 to 2.5. In the grape 
beverage methyl anthranilate, oil of cognac, and grape juice ad ded sometimes. Blue FCF 
color and the tartaric acid is permitted. 1 to 2.5 is the CO 2 volume of gas. Similarly, lemon 
and lime data also contain either lime juice, oil of lemon, lem on juice. Tartrazine is added 
even in the lime. Lime has no color. Citric acid is added in bo th lemon and lime beverages. 
Lemon beverage contain 1.5 volume of the CO 2 gas but the lime beverage contains around 4 
to 4.5 volume of the gas.  
 
Soft drinks 
The major ingredients of the soft drink are water, flavour emul sion and emulsifier, colouring 
agents, sweeteners maybe sugar and sugar substitute, acids and preservatives and carbon 
dioxide. So, a quality soft drink should have a balanced blend of flavour at proper intensity 
leaving a clean mouth taste with no lingering flavour or unplea sant after taste and it should 
have a proper carbonation to imp art zest and sparkle to drink.  
 
Water 
The main component of any beverage (carbonated beverage or in t he soft drink) is the water. 
The quality of water used to manufacture the soft drink is of p rime importance and much 
attention is given to its treatment and to its behavior particu larly in relation to the other 7 
 constituents. The water which may be satisfactory for household  drinking may not be suitable 
soft drinks manufacturing. Most of the soft drink manufacturing  plants are provided with 
their water treatment unit. The water is treated for the remova l of any unstable iron by 
oxidation or by flocculation. Any sediments are removed by sand  filtration. Water is made 
soft by ion exchange. It is sterilized by the addition of chlor ine gas. It is filtered through 
active carbon or treated wit h UV light at the end.  
 
Flavouring 
The flavorings can be imparted by the fruits, fruit juices, and  or essences. They are 
comparatively smaller components. Majority of the soft drinks a re flavored by synthetic 
flavouring materials, solutions o f some natural extracts or mos t likely sometimes a mixture of 
both. Isopropyl alcohol is generally used for extracting the es sence or in the synthetic 
essences. When such essences are used in clean products, such a s lemonade, it does not 
produce any clouds and preparation is suitable for use as flavo uring materials for soft drinks.  
Factors affecting the flavorings  
Factors affecting the flavorings  include type of water and degr ee of carbonation used. The 
sweeteners and extra acid added also play an important role. So me flavours are best 
associated with special acids. 
 
Commonly used acids for flavours 8 
 Most commonly used acids for flavours include citric acid but t artaric acid also gives 
different flavour. Likewise, colas they use phosphoric acid and  glucose syrup drink use lactic 
acid or a mixture of lactic acid and citric acid. Other permitt ed acids are malic, ascorbic, 
nicotinic, acetic acids.  
Types of flavourings  
Types of flavorings include nat ural flavourings, derived from t he natural sources or nature 
identical flavourings, which is d erived from chemical synthesis  but identical to the compound 
found in nature. Artificial fla vour is fully synthetic flavorin g material without any natural 
substances. 
 
Colouring 
The colouring decision is drive n by the consumer perception of the product appearance. The 
use of artificial colours have  been decreased significantly as they are regarded as 
unacceptable by many consumers. The  addition of colouring to a soft drink immediately 
creates complicated chemical probl ems because most of these col ours are synthetic colours. 
They blend up with various chemi cal compounds. These chemical c ompounds will have 
interactions with the flavour ing compounds, with other componen ts. Most of the synthetic 
colorings have a leuco - form, which is produced by che mical reduction of the colourin g 
matter. This can occur when sulphur  dioxide is used as a preser vative. And many complex 
reactions may occur with this sulphur dioxide, fruit components  and even with the other 
colouring materials, which are used. Some of the permitted colo urs are given here in the 
table.  9 
 
 
Sweeteners 
Sweeteners in a soft drink is con tributed either by sugar or by  an artificial sweetener. In the 
soft drink regulations ‘sugar’ m eans ‘any soluble carbohydrate sweetening matter.’ The 
‘ s u g a r ’  h a s  a  f a r  w i d e r  i m p l i c a t i o n  t h a n  j u s t  s u c r o s e .  S u c r o s e  is most commonly used 
sweetening material. But the other compounds such as glucose sy rup, fructose and invert 
sugars are also becoming more and more popular slowly and slowl y. Process control during 
the blending and bottling operation is usually monitored by Bri x measurement. Thus, the 
blending of syrup and water will  require recalibrating. Inversi on of sugar, i.e., hydrolysis 
sucrose into glucose and fructose, will cause the Brix of the b ottling syrup to slowly increase 
by up to 5% on the prolonged standin g, especially if the syrup is warm. 
 
Artificial sweeteners 
The use of cyclamates as sweeteners caused a surge of reformula tion of soft drinks in which 
sucrose was partially substituted either by cyclamate, or sacch arin or by a mixture of both. 
When the use of cyclamates was banned, formulators had to fall back on the use of saccharin 
alone. Today, the only legally permitted artificial sweeteners in the form of saccharin calcium 
and saccharin sodium are allowed. It is usual to use a mixture of sugar and saccharin in soft 
drinks and the legal limits for each of them are clearly stated  in the country’s regulations. 
Aspartame is a low-calorie, artificial sweetener that is 200 ti mes as sweet as natural sugar. 10 
 Aspartame is recommended by FSSAI for use in soft drinks with a  maximum limit of 700 
ppm.  
 
Preservatives 
The permitted preservatives are given in the table. The categor y, ‘soft drinks for direct 
consumption, that is consumption after dilution not otherwise s pecified in this schedule, 
including the comminuted citrus b ases for the preparation of so ft drinks’ includes the 
preservatives like sulphur dioxi de and its permitted concentrat ion is 350 ppm, benzoic acid-
800 ppm, methyl 4 hydroxy benzoate -800 ppm and ethyl 4 hydroxy benzoate, propyl 4 
hydroxy benzoatet both-800 ppm. Th e category of the soft drink,  which is for consumption 
without any dilution, not otherwis e specified in this schedule,  includes the same level of the 
preservative like sulphur dioxide , whose level is fixed at uppe r limit is 70 ppm and other are 
160 ppm. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Process flowchart of soft drink manufacturing 
This is the process flowchart for soft drink manufacturing. In the soft drink manufacturing 
normally, there are two methods. One is that, a syrup is made b y dissolving the sugar. Then 
the flavour concentrate is separately made. It contains all the  flavouring materials, colouring 
components, acid etc. and the preservatives. The sugar syrup is  made separately and then the 
11 
 flavour concentrate is added into it. It is dissolved and then it is diluted and finally carbon 
dioxide is added into the diluted syrup, that is one way. This water is carbonated. Then in the 
prepared sugar syrup containing flavourings etc., carbonated wa ter is added. Most of the 
standard manufacturing company keep the composition of the flav our concentrate, as highly 
guarded secret. They produce this syrup and the flavour concent rates are distributed in 
different countries and locations, where they have the carbonat ion facility, dilution facility, 
where liquid water is added as for the formulation and carbon d ioxide is passed to these 
beverages to be carbonated. 
 
Fruit material as soft drinks/beverage ingredients 
The fruit materials are divided into two categories. They are o f two types like comminutes or 
comminuted fruits that is a term reserved for citrus, where par ts of all the main components 
like peel, pith, juice, and peel oil etc.  are combined into a pulpy mixture that is finely milled 
and then preserved and this is used as an ingredient for mixing  in the beverage. The cloudy 
extracts are also a specialized citrus product manufactured by extracting de-oiled peel and 
pulp residues with hot water with the addition of pectolytic en zymes. The filtered cloudy 
liquids are then pasteurized and concentrated and this is used in the beverage manufacture. 
The comminuted fruits are used f or the production of ‘whole fru it drink’. Comminutes deliver 
more colour, flavour, and cloud than juices. The cloudy extract s are often used in recipes for 
citrus based soft drinks to obtain a good cloud but can introdu ce a slightly cooked marmalade 
note to the flavour. 
 12 
 Associated problems 
When the fruit juice or fruit pulp is to be used in a soft drin k or in a beverage, there are 
certain issues which need to be resolved like inclusion of frui t makes it more vulnerable to 
yeasts and molds. If the juice or liquid beverage is not proper ly pasteurized, then these yeast 
and molds may create problems. Oils, especially from citrus fru its get oxidized. Solids 
accumulations near neck or bottom of the bottle like squash. Se lection of proper emulsifiers 
and stabilizing agents becomes necessary. Often new flavour is developed by blending many 
flavours in order to defy imitation and to remain unique. When the enzymes in fruit 
preparations have not been deactivated, the enzymes will contin ue to act on the pectins and 
the cloud stability can be lost.  
 
Nutraceutical or functional ingredients 
They are used as an ingredient in drinks, which are claimed to have functional benefits in 
addition to being thirst quenching. Vitamins, minerals, antioxi dants are the most commonly 
used functional ingredients and they are found in the natural f ruit, vegetable juices. Vitamin 
A is added in soft drinks as beta  carotene or provitamin A beca use it is converted to vitamin 
A in the body. B vitamins are added frequently into the sport d rinks. The most commonly 
added mineral is calcium, which is associated with the bone and  teeth health, but other 
minerals such as zinc are also used. Sodium, which is the key m ineral, that is lost during the 
perspiration process, is also a dded into the sports drinks.  
 13 
 Additives and their functions 
Acids and acidity regulators are used to control the pH and tot al acidity of a drink. Acidity is 
a fundamental characteristic of any soft drink. The balance bet ween sweetness and sharpness 
is known as the ‘Brix acid ratio’ and it is the key parameter t o the formulation of a soft drink.  
Anti-foaming agent- The only permitted anti foaming agent is di methyl polysiloxane (E900). 
It is permitted up to 10 mg/L to prevent head formation.  
Antioxidants in soft drinks, like ascorbic acid is added to pro tect the flavour from staleness 
and to protect the colour of the product.  
Stabilizers-In cloudy fruit juices , pectin is added to increase  the stability and appearance of a 
soft drink. Sugar provides considerable “thickness and mouthfee l” to a drink and when it is 
replaced by a high intensity sweetener. The drink can lack the ‘body’ in the mouth. This can 
be resorted by the use of a thickener such as pectin. There are  also a number of the specificity 
gums, for example gums like gua r gum, carob, xanthan gum etc. c an also be used as a 
stabilizer agent or t hickening agent.  
 
Process flowchart carbonated fruit beverage preparation 
This is the process flow chart for the fruit beverage preparati on. Water softening in the stage 
1 and then heating evaporation and carbonation in the stage 2 a re done. The water is 
carbonated in the secondary stage of mixing and in the third st age, carbonated water is 
coming to the mixing tank. In the mixing tank, the carbonated w ater is mixed with a 
colouring material, syrup, or f lavour. Fruit juice and pulp are  also added in this stage. Finally, 
the whole mixture is filtere d properly, homogenized, and sent t o the packaging unit. 14 
 
 
Waste water treatment plant in beverage industry 
In the beverage unit for cleaning, a lot of waste influent wate r is generated. Most of these 
beverage manufacturers, the bever age industries have their wast ewater treatment plant to 
optimize the water use or to improve the water use efficiency. This is a schematic of a 
wastewater treatment. The collected water is taken, it is presc reened, and then sent to the 
equalization tank, where there is  salted chemicals reactions an d tanks. The impurities, the 
sludges are dissolved in this as they are removed, through the sludge thickening tank, they are 
removed. It is recirculated agai n. After treatment, the effluen t is collected here. So, this is in 
brief about wastewater treatment.  
 
Case study: Carbonated aonla beverage premix 
Aonla is an underutilized fruit. It is a natural source of anti oxidants like vitamin C and 
polyphenols etc. Because of high astringency, and because of it s bitter taste, it cannot be 
consumed as fresh and therefore, it is processed traditionally into various products. The 
carbonated aonla juice helps in i ncreasing the taste with its c haracteristic flavour. Aonla 
powder was developed using spra y drying technique. Carbonation powder was formulated 
with a mixture of acidulants and sodium bicarbonate in differen t ratios. These aonla powder 
and carbonation powders were mi xed to get the carbonated aonla drink. 15 
 
 
Process flowchart for preparation of carbonated anola beverage premix 
This is the process flowchart for the preparation of carbonated  aonla beverage premix. The 
aonla is taken. It is blanched using either hot water or microw ave. After blanching it, make it 
soft. Then the juice is extracted. After the extraction of juic e, it is dried and then ground into 
fine powder. Some instantization treatment to the powder is giv en then. This instantized fiber 
powder and aonla juice are together mixed in a particular propo rtion and spray dried. Spray 
dried powder is obtained. The spray dried aonla powder and the carbonation powder are 
developed separately. Both are mixed in the proper proportion a nd the carbonated aonla 
powder premix is obtained. This can be dissolved in water, luke warm water, or normal water. 
In plain water, it has a good so lubility, good reconstitution. A very good tasty beverage is 
obtained in this way.  
 
Carbonated aonla beverage powder preparation 
In the experiment, various combinations and permutations were u sed. The aonla powder was 
varied from 50 to 70% and carbonation powder from 30 to 50%. It  was measured for the pH 
and sensory characteristics like colour, mouthfeel, taste, afte r taste, taste, aroma etc. and then 
it was formed finally. The sample with ratio of 70:30, gave bes t sensory characteristics with 
an acceptability of 8.56. The carbonated powder was found to ha ve shelf life of about more 
than 6 months. 5 gram of premix is required to prepare 100 ml c arbonated beverage containg 
90 mg vitamn C., 0.2 g protein, 0.2 g fiber, and 1 mg Fe. 5 gra ms of that is required to 16 
 prepare 100 ml of carbonated beverage, aonla beverage, which co ntains 90 milligram of 
vitamin C, 0.2 grams protein, 0.2 grams fiber and 1 milligram o f iron you can see. So, it 
becomes a very good nutritive and refreshing beverage or it can  be considered as health 
beverage.  
 
Methods to assess fruit cont ent in carbonated drinks 
There are various methods to assess the fruit content like the ash content, and nitrogen 
content or level of the minerals like potassium, phosphorus, am ino acid etc. The easiest 
method normally is to assess the potassium and other ions in th e carbonated drink. However, 
the major disadvantage of this me thod is that it is easy for an  unscrupulous manufacturer to 
circumvent by directly adding pot assium or other salts from out side. But it will be difficult to 
know that whether the potassium or other salts are from the fru it juice or it has been added 
from outside. So, alternate methods were developed to take care  o f  s u c h  p r o b l e m s .  T h e  
characteristic component of the fr uit juice should be used as a  parameter to evaluate the 
content or presence in the car bonated drink. So, that can be us ed as a marker parameter to 
evaluate the content of the prese nce of this particular juice i n the drink. For examples, Quinic 
acid in Cranberry, isocitric aci d in orange, grape or lemons sh ould be analyzed. So, a specific 
marker can determine the level of a particular juice or pulp in  a carbonated drink that should 
be used.  
 17 
 
 
 
In summary, it can be said that carbonated soft drinks are very  important category of 
beverages. These soft drinks available in the market do not hav e any nutritional value except 
that of the sucrose or sugar, whi ch is added as a sweetening ag ent, otherwise they are taken as 
the thirst quenching drinks. But when these fruits or vegetable  juices, pulp etc. are added in 
the beverages, they become a source of micronutrient. The nutri tional value and health value 
of these drinks are increased. Such carbonated beverages can be  used as a health drink, as a 
supplement for nutrition purposes. But adding the natural fruit  juices pulps, it may invite 
certain problems, which must be resolved. There should be stand ard methods for proper 
mixing of the fruit ingredients that should not be interfering with the other components in this 
soft drink or beverage etc. So, the carbonated fruit drinks can  be fortified based on their 
purposes, either by vitamins or other minerals etc. It can be p romoted in the market as a 
health drink. The referen ces are mentioned above.  