1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 42 
Spice Powders 
 
 
The concepts covered in this lecture are grinding of spices, di fferent spice powders, sambhar 
powder, packaging of spice powders, and quality assurance. 2 
 
 
Spice powders 
Spice powders are produced by gr inding dried spices. Spice powd ers are commercially 
available in single or mixed for m. Low moisture content and wat er activity allow long-term 
storage and the preservation of  their functionalities. Differen t spice powders are mixed in 
appropriate quantities and they are sold either in the form of curry powder, sambar powder, 
or masala powder. There are two important things i.e. low moist ure content and low water 
activity and presence of the antimicrobial and natural antimicr obials, makes the spices to 
store better for the larger peri od of times. However, during st orage the care should be taken. 
Proper, appropriate methods or packaging should be done so that  their functionalities are 
retained. So the process of producing a spice powders generally  include the preparation of 
raw materials, processing to form powders and then miscellaneou s operations like mixing, 
separation, agglomeratio n, and encapsulation. 
 
Grinding of spices 3 
 Grinding is the process of size reduction of any substances sub jecting to mechanical forces 
(impact, compression, compression, shear, and cutting). The aim  of the grinding process is to 
obtain spice powder with specific quality attributes such as ar oma and flavor. The selection 
of appropriate size reduction mach ine requires the understandin g of the machine’s parameters 
viz. grinding tools shape, size, sharpness, clearance, and scre en opening size, etc., and 
material characteristics such a s type, size, shape, hardness, e tc. 
 
Conventional method for grinding of spices 
During conventional grinding, heat  is generated when energy is used to convert the spices 
into powder form.  During grinding, the temperature of the prod uct rises to a level in the 
range of 42–95°C which varies with the oil and moisture content  of the spices.  Some 
disadvantages of conventional pr ocess are significant loss of v olatile oil content due to the 
high temperature generated dur ing grinding, clogging of the gri nder sieve due to the high 
fiber and volatile oil content, problems with sticking at the g rinder wall and sieve due to the 
high fat content, high consumpti on of energy due to heat dissip ation during grinding. 
 4 
 Typical size reduction machinery 
The table shows the conventional machinery which are used for s ize reduction of the spices 
including their schematic diagra ms, size reduction mechanisms a long with their peripheral 
speed. For example, the size reduction mechanism involved in th e pin and disc mill is impact 
force and the peripheral sp eed varies from 80-160 m/s. 
 
Also in the hammer mill, the impact is normally used. Ball mill  involves impact and shear to 
reduce the particle size. Turbo mill uses impact, shear and cut ting etc. for reducing the size.  
 
Cryogenic grinding 
The problems caused by high temperatures in convectional grindi ng can be overcome through 
the use of a low temperature gri nding process that relies on a cryogenic fluid such as liquid 
nitrogen, is known as cryogenic grinding. In this technique, th e product is processed at 
temperatures of between −20 °C (for black pepper) and −70 °C (f or cumin seed). A low feed 
temperature significant ly restricts temperature increase during  grinding, and therefore has a 5 
 positive effect on product quality, particularly in terms of vo latile oil content. Lower feed 
temperature causes reduction of particle size ensuring greater consistency, because the liquid 
nitrogen, at a temperature as low as –195.6 °C, causes the oil to become brittle, thus 
facilitating fine grinding. 
 
This is a schematic of a cryogenic grinding system which is a v ery useful machine for a spice 
grinding. There is a liquid nitrogen cylinder which may be some  e i t h e r  a  d i g i t a l  w e i g h i n g  
balance, etc. so that the majo r amount of liquid nitrogen can b e circulated through this 
connecting pipe to the spice. With the help of conveyor, the sp ice comes in the cryogenic pre 
cooler machine system where it is, it comes in direct contact, the spice comes in direct 
contact with the liqui d nitrogen or such oth er coolant. So its temperature goes down and then 
it is passed to the grinder. In the pin mill or hammer mill, gr ounded spice is then taken to the 
cyclone separator where that is or even vibro sieving system an d then the particles are 
separated from the, liquid nitrogen.  
 
Advantages of cryogenic grinding 6 
 It has several advantages like No grinder sieve clogging, since  the low temperatures make the 
spice fibers brittle, more unifo rm distribution of flavour, les s energy consumed in the 
grinding process, lower fire ri sk, no dust production, and henc e no risk of dust explosion, and 
lower risk of contamination. 
 
Comparison of conventiona l and cryogenic grinding 
This table represents the comparison between the conventional g rinding and cryogenic 
grinding. For example, the energy consumption, conventional has  energy high energy 
consumption and cryogenic grinding low energy consumption. Simi larly, grinding of the soft 
material is very difficult in the conventional grinding but it is possible by the cryogenic 
grinding. Air pollution is high in case of conven tional grindin g but there is no pollution in 
case of cryogenic grinding. Even throughput in the conventional  grinding is low but in the 
cryogenic grinding throughput is hi gh. Initial cost or operatin g cost both is low in 
conventional but in the cryogeni c grinding initial cost as well  as operating costs may be high. 
 7 
 Grinding method, powder preparat ion and particle size of spice powders 
 
Cinnamon, coriander, star anise, black pepper are either milled  in knife mill at ambient 
temperature and particle size are normally around less than or equal to 250 microns is 
obtained. Rotor mill is used for black pepper and particle size  in the range of 326 to 352 
micron can be obtained. For turmeric, hammer mill is used ambie nt average particle size is 
obtained 472 microns but the h ammer mill under the cryogenic sy stem, it gives around 296 or 
300 particle size. 
 
Effect of grinding temperature on  particle size ranges of spice  powders 
As shown in the table, cumin seed if the grinding is done at mi nus 60 degrees Celsius, the 
volume mean diameter may be 55, volatile essential oil 3.3 ml p er 100 gram. The same if it is 
grounded at minus 130 degree Celsius, the volume mean diameter will be 65. However, there 
is not much difference on the essential oil. But if the tempera ture is minus 70, the volume 
mean diameter is 98. So the temperature when go towards the low er side that is minus 160, at 
such a low temperature the volum e mean diameter is the lowest. 8 
 
 
Turmeric powder 
Ground turmeric is mostly used on the retail market, and by the  food processors. Turmeric 
powder is a major ingredient in curry powders and pastes. Rhizo mes are ground to 
approximately 60-80 mesh particle  size. Since curcuminoids, the  colour constituents of 
turmeric, deteriorate with light, it should be packed in a UV p rotective packaging and 
appropriately stored. 
 
Process for production of turmeric powder 
The rhizome is taken, cleaned, cured and cooked, then dried, fo llowed by polishing, grinding, 
sieving and packaging. Traditionally in India, plate mills or h ammer mills are used for 
grinding making into turmeric pow der but attrition mill or pin mill can also be used. 
 9 
 
 
Red chilli powder  
The harvested red chillies, well-ripened chilli parts are taken  and are kept for 2 to 3 days to 
develop uniform red colour. Then these are subjected to sun dry ing or artificial drying; dried 
to 8 to 10 percent final moisture content. Then these are grade d or sorted according to size, 
weight and colour and dry cleaning is done to remove all the fo reign matters that lower the 
quality and endanger the sale of the commodity. Then stem cutti ng is done to remove the 
stem makes crushing easier. Crushing and milling are done in 2- 3 rounds of proper grinding 
to obtain the red chilli powder. After drying, these are ground ed to make the powder. Even 
the vacuum conveyors are used for conveying the chilli powder w hich is finally, that is the 
powder water content, moisture content may be up to 8 percent o r so. It is finally packed in 
polyethylene pouches. 
 
Large cardamom powder 10 
 Large Cardamom powder is produced by grinding of dried seeds wi th moisture content 10% 
to fine powder followed by sieving. It is used as flavoring and  preservative to different types 
of coffee, liquors, confections, and beverages. Volatile oil (2 -4%) is the principal aroma-
giving compound in large cardamom.  Large cardamom powder is pro duced by grinding of 
dried seeds with moisture conten t 10% to fine powder followed b y sieving. 
 
Curing of large cardamom 
In the large cardamom, curing is very-very important operation.  It determines the quality of 
the dried capsule. It is done to lower the moisture content to 10 to 12 percent where weight 
ratio from fresh to cured capsu le is around 4:1 to 5:1 and the ideal temperature of the curing 
is 45 to 55 ᵒC so that the proper flavour , volatile oils a re produced. 
there are traditional curing Bhattis which are constructed usin g the mud and bricks. The 
capsules are spread over the drying platform and hot smoke from  the firewood are passed 
through; takes about 35 to 40 hours for complete drying. Howeve r, it has a poor operating 
thermal efficiency. 
So in some cases, these traditional curing Bhattis are modified  with flue pipe curing house. 
Here indirect system of drying. The flue pipe is connected it t o a higher place with the exit 
provided. Smoke does not come in direct contact. Original flavo ur, colour is retained and 
capacity may be 200 to 400 kg of fresh capsules and drying time  vary 17 to 24 hours. 
And even a gasifier curing system may be used sometime like whi c h  i s  s o l i d  f u e l s  i n t o  
gaseous fuel by partial combustion. It is updraft type of bioma ss gasifier and it gives a better 
quality of the dried material. 11 
 
 
Equipment used for processing of large cardamom powder 
So these are the some of the equ i p m e n t  w h i c h  a r e  u s e d ,  s u c h  a s  traditional curing Bhatti, 
modified Bhatti, gasifier syste m, solar dryer, pulverizer, vert ical filling machines.  
 
Ginger powder 
Ginger powder is important ingredient of curry powder, also use d in ginger wine, ginger beer 
and baked goods. For ginger powder the main raw material is dry  ginger. Cleaning and 
washing is done to remove debris, shoots, and roots, and placin g of rhizome in boiling water 
for 10 min. These are sorted according to size, shape, weight, image and color. Clean brown-
yellow and bright colore d ginger are preferred. 12 
 
 
Peeling serves to remove the scaly epidermis and facilitate dry ing. Peeling of fully matured 
rhizomes is done by scrapping the outer skin. Dipping in a slur ry of slaked lime Ca(OH) 2 till 
the rhizomes become uniformly white in colour. Liming gives gin ger a better appearance and 
less susceptibility to the attack of insect pests during storag e and shipping. Then it is dried. 
This peeled and bleached ginger slices, they are dried to moist ure content of 10 percent or so, 
either sand drying or mechanical drying at around 60 degrees Ce lsius temperature can be 
used. And in mechanical drying, the drying time of the sliced g inger is around 5 to 6 hours 
and the peeled ginger maybe 16 to 18 hours. Then after drying, they are subjected to 
pulverizing that is milling, grindi ng to obtain small particle sizes with good product quality in 
terms of flavour and colour and the hammer mill, attrition mill , or pin mills etc. are used.  
 
Equipment used for production of ginger powder 
These are the equipment for ma king ginger powder as shown in th e figure.  13 
 
 
Coriander powder 
Seeds are completely dry they begin to detach from the stalk; c ollected, and grind to obtain 
the fine powder. Coriander powder is used in seafood, sodas, pi ckles, bakery, and curry 
recipes. So the processing operations mainly involved are clean ing, drying, and grinding or 
pulverizing. So cleaning uses vibro separator, even electronic colour sorters also used to 
separate discoloured seeds and a gravity separator can also be used. The drying temperature 
should not exceed more than 100 ᵒC as preferable may be 70 ᵒC. Solar or mechanical drying, 
both can be used but traditionally solar drying is used. Grindi ng is done to a fine powder. 
 
Black pepper powder 
Black pepper powder that is harv ested as the fully mature black  pepper that is 1 to 2 berries 
start turning yellow to red in each spike. After that is solar dried for 3 to 5 days or mechanical 
dried and these dried pepper are ground in the hammer mill, pin  mill or plate mills, 
pulverized and packaged suitably. 14 
 
 
Equipment used for processing of black pepper powder 
Ingredients used for processing of bulk black pepper powder are  mechanical pepper thresher, 
solar cabinet dryer, black pepper spiral separator, black peppe r cleaner cum grader, finally 
grinder and the filling machine, ffs machine and labelling mach ine. 
 
Mint powder 
Dehydrator: Wash and drain thor oughly on absorbent towels and d ehydrate. 
Natural air drying: Dry in the dark by hanging bunches upside d own in paper bags. Choose a 
well ventilated, dust free area for 1-2 weeks. 
Oven drying: Use low heat less than 80 °C. Spread leaves on a s heet for 2 to 4 h. 
Microwave drying: Microwave for 1 to 2 min (check after 1 min a nd microwave in additional 
10 s increments as needed). 15 
 
 
Sambhar powder 
Sambhar powder is a popular blend of spices used to make Sambha r, a popular broth which is 
made of vegetables and cooked lentils and tamarind paste. Sambh ar powder can also be 
added to curries, vegetable dishes, soups or stews toward the e nd of cooking to impart a 
typical south Indian flavor to the dish. So ingredients for the  sambhar powder include 
coriander seed, dried chilli, pepper, turmeric, Bengal gram, fe nugreek, cumin, asafoetida, and 
curry leaves in the proportion as given here in the table. 
 
So these materials are taken in the appropriate recipe, appropr iate quantity spices are taken 
then these spices are individually dried and then roasted and f inally pulverized to the desired 
size. And after grinding, they are mixed in the proper proporti on and sometimes even 2-3 
similar spices they can be mixed together in their similar temp eratures etc., they can be 
uniform if their roasting temperature can be of same type so th at can also be done but one has 
to try an experiment with this. And then finally packaging. So generally, drying should be 
done at 55 to 60 degrees Celsius for 1 hour. Roasting maybe 180  degrees Celsius for 2 to 3 16 
 minutes enhances the flavour. Grinding under controlled tempera ture condition or even 
cryogenic grinding is recommended. And then mixing using ribbon  blender. That is all these 
ground spices they are mixed. And in fact, the same method that  is used for making different 
m a s a l a s  i n  t h e  m a r k e t .  T h e r e  a r e  v a r i o u s  m a s a l a -  c h i c k e n  m a s a l a , curry masala, curry 
powder, chole masala, etc. So there all these spices in appropr iate quantity, appropriate 
proportion are roasted and ground masala, they are mixed using ribbon blender or such other 
blender in appropriate quantity as per the formulation and they  are packaged and sold as a 
specific brand in the masala. 
 
Packaging of spice powder 
The packaging of the spice powde r is a very important operation . It protects a nd preserves the 
spices with a stand-up pouches with nothing locks and gas relea se valves, tear notches, 
heavy-duty zipper tops, hang holes , pour sprouts, e tc. can be u sed for sealing the pouches. 
And both for the bulk packaging of the spices, paper bags lamin ated with HDPE woven 
fabrics on the inner side and inside a liner LDEP or HDPE can b e used or even multiwall 
paper sacks, textile bags, and HDPE woven sacks are used for bu lk packaging of the 
powdered spices. 
In the institutional packs, BOPP laminate pouches put into a co rrugated box as a territory 
package. Ground spices packaged in aluminium pouches and paper board cartons can also be 
used. Even curry powders are placed in the PET jars. 17 
 
 
Quality assurance mechanism for powdered spices 
Then quality assurance mechanism for the powdered spices that i s the right stage of harvest 
decides the quality. Not only the right stage of the harvest bu t the appropriate processing and 
post harvest operation that is cleaning, proper winnowing to re move the dirt, then storage in 
hygienic and well ventilate d godowns. It ensures a good product . 
Specifications include both tota l ash, acid-insoluble ash, vola tile oil, moisture content, colour, 
granulation. So all these are the properties which should be pr operly there. There are 
protocols. They should be analys ed. It should be ensured that t hey contain these values. 
Spice powders are stored in ti ghtly closed container below 4.4 degrees Celsius and 60 percent 
humidity. Some spices need stora ge at lower temperature of abou t 2 to 5 degrees Celsius to 
prevent mould infestation. Even high levels of moisture in the ground or whole spices 
indicate or it facilitate or it indicate that low quality becau se it can facilitate mould or other 
growth. 
 18 
 Quality specifications 
These are for the quality specifications for different spices, are of different grades and in the 
Bureau of Indian Standards or ev en FSSAI also has decided like in the ISI-1798 of 1961 can 
be used to for quality specifica tion for black pepper whole and  ground. 
Chilli powder, ISI-2445-1963. Coriander powder IS-2444-1963. Cu rry powder similarly, 
turmeric powder, they are given a different specification in th is. Even there are methods of 
sampling and test of spices and condiments are provided in the IS-1997-19. So these methods 
are well regarded, so industry must use this and then must ensu re that the spices meet to the 
quality requirements. 
 
Market factors 
The global market for spices con tinued demand during 83,468 kil o tons by 2024, at CAGR of 
2.84% from 2018 to 2024. Increase i n versatile demand across va rious food and beverage 
segments is likely to drive the global spices market 2016 to 20 22. In FY20, spices worth US$ 
3.65 billion (Rs. 21515 crore) were exported. During FY19, a to tal of 1.10 million tonnes of 
spices and spice products va lued US$ 2.80 billion was exported from the country.   19 
 
 
In summary, Spice powder proce ssing includes preparation of raw  materials, grinding and 
mixing, packaging, etc. The preparation of culinary powders, an d particularly of spice 
powder, requires special attent ion to ensure that functional su bstances such as volatile 
flavorus, which can easily be lost during processing, are retai ned to an acceptable level. Mild 
processing such as cryogenic grinding or low temperature extrac tion is therefore                        
becoming popular grinding techniqu e. The selection of appropria te grinding machine depends 
upon the machine’s parameters and material characteristics. Sta ndardized packaging 
materials are used to retain the fragrance, property and extend  higher shelf life of all 
products. 
 20 
 
 
These are the references u sed in this lecture. Thank you. 