Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
 Professor H N Mishra 
Agri culture and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
Lecture 40 
Coconut and Cashew Processing 
 
Hello, everybody, Namaste. In the last lecture of 8th module, t oday we will discuss on coconut 
and cashew processing.  
Concepts covered 
 
The concepts that will be covered in today's lecture include co conut processing steps like 
cleaning, dehusking, waxing, nut spl itting et cetera. Tradition al and novel value-added products 
made from coconut like, coconut  milk and desiccated coconut, co conut water, tender coconut. 
And we will also discuss something about coconut industry in In dia: its strength, constraints 
and what are the various possibilities. And finally, we will di scuss the cashew nut processing, 
which is another very very important product. 
Coconut ( Cocos nucifera ) 
 
Coconut ( Cocos nucifera ). It belongs to the palm family, which is one of the largest i n the 
monocotyledon group. Coconut is described as one of the nature' s greatest gift to man. Every 
part of the coconut palm can be used for food, functional mater ials and ornamental purposes. 
Indonesia, Philippines, India and Sri Lanka are the major cocon ut producing countries in the 
world.  
If you look at the cross section of the coconut fruit, you will  see that it has a smooth, waxy 
epidermis, a fibrous mesocarp and a ligneous endocarp. A brown testa, surrounds the seed 
which encloses a white layer of the meat that yields copra oil and an opalescent liquid coconut 
water.  
Primary Processing of Coconut 
 
So, the processing of coconut primary processing. You can see t hat the matured, coconut are 
harvested manually by the palm tree or coconut tree using hand implements. The farmers, they 
have to, they have to raise the tree or plant and then manually , they cut this coconut, tender 
coconut. Then it is taken and s ubjected to traditional method o f dehusking.  
That is again, either manually or with a manual hand operated e quipment et cetera, they dehusk, 
remove the outer husk, and then the dehusked coconut is shelled , that is put to net deshelling 
operation where the fibrous part, outer is removed and hard cov ering, its content, this is also 
removed manually, and one gets the deshelled coconut as you can  see here in the figure. But 
this is a very ted ious operation.  
Value added products of coconut 
 
So, various value added products of coconut include, the tender  c o c o n u t  i s  t a k e n  f r o m  t h e  
coconut palm tree, and the inflorescence, and this inflorescenc e which give the sap, that is you 
see that manually they put some container, earthen pot et ceter a where the sap is collected. And 
this sap is a very, very good na tural beverage. It contains a l ot of micronutrients, et cetera and 
health beneficial components.  
But the major problem with the sap is that as soon as sun rays fall on it, its alcoholic 
fermentation takes place and this sap is converted into Toddy, that is the alcoholic beverage. 
Otherwise this, what the farme rs, they do, early morning they g o, they collect thi s sap and this 
is used for the preparation of c oconut jaggery or even, it is u sed for the fermentation and 
preparation of vinegar.  
Next is that this coconut, once after a tender co conut is obtai ned from the plant  and this tender 
coconut is used for making tende r coconut water, and then the o uter, that is the malai  portion, 
or the white meat, soft meat which is there inside the coconut,  it is used for either making chips 
are also used in the ice cream pr oducts et cetera, for mixing.  
Then the mature coconut, which is obtained, the mature coconut again, it is used for making 
water, or then, coconut water which is converted into Nata de c oco or the meaty portion is used 
is may be desiccated coconut, it can be drie d and desiccated co conut powder, or it can be used 
to make coconut milk, coconut milk. 
It can dried, and it makes coconut milk powder or even it can b e used for extraction of oil, that 
is Virgin Coconut oil. Here this  meat can also be desiccated co conut milk and coconut flour. 
So, these are one set of the product. Other set of the product may be that this copra, copra is 
used for expressing, that is RBD oil or making copra cake. So, these are the different various 
set of products which can be used from the coconut fruit, which  can be prepared from the 
coconut fruit.  
Processing of coconut products: Overview 
 
Here, it is given a general a schematic flowchart for the makin g, various of processing a coconut 
products, an overview. That is, young coconut transported to th e processing site and then 
coconut is used in the bunches et cetera and in the processing site, when in the industry, it 
comes, it is used for quality checking, the fruit quality check ing. 
And after it is checked for quality, then it is next sent to th e processing line where first trim, 
second trim, dip in SMB and then shrink and wrap boxes et ceter a, is that the cocoa, that is 
coconut root, inner material is taken and it is stored at 4 deg rees Celsius. And then coconuts 
for local export market, it is used.  
Otherwise also, what you can do that is FM portion, which is ca n be sent for the next operation 
like directly it is washed, the n it is cut manually either manu ally it is cut or it is cut automated 
equipments are there, cutting equipments, and then coconut, it is pressed for coconut water and 
coconut water is fermented and converted into Nata de coco prod uct. So, these are the actually 
in this line, three major products, coconut water, Nata de coco  and coconut, whole coconut for 
individual used locally food or f or other purpose, it is used..   
 
It is a little bigger scenario that is the same processing step s at a glance. It is given where the 
various products like Nata de coco, then coconut water, coconut  water concentrate, it is 
subjected to concentration pro cess, concentrated and then cocon ut beverage, that is water can 
be further mixed with oth er components et cetera.  
It can be converted into a beverage or coconut milk powder, ful l fat coconut milk powder, 
skimmed coconut milk or virgin coconut oil or low fat desiccate d coconut, it can be made from 
white meat residue or even virgin coconut oil or animal feed fr om the brown meat residue 
desiccated coconut or RBD oil.  
So, these are the various products which are prepared from the coconut for food consumption 
for that animal food consumption, and their route is given here . Apart from that, this also can 
be like coconut water or animal feed et cetera. Some of the was te products, which also has the 
valuable food. Then, these are the  various overview of the coco nut processing is shown here. 
Tender coconut water 
 
Now let us see at least a few important products, what are the tender coconut water. So, it is 
the liquid endosperm of a tender coconut at an age of approxima tely 9 months from the time 
of pollination, the period before the solid endosperm or white meat are formed. That is the one 
period which contains the liqui d coconut water, tender coconut water, we say, that inside the 
meaty portion, in that form. 
So, tender coconut water is obviously a very, very good source,  natural source of electrolyte 
minerals, vitamins, complex carbohydrates, amino acids, and man y other micronutrients. It is 
rich in potassium and other minerals, you can see here in this figure, that is given, it has around 
106 milligram percent of the iron per 100 ml.  
A glucose content is maximum in seven months old nuts and hence , it is best stage for the 
drinking. This makes coconut water particularly suitable for bu rgeoning sports drink market 
because the coconut water, it is a protein also, very less, but  fat content, maybe 0.01 percent, 
mineral, 0.6, it reducing sugar 4.4 percent, total solids 6.5 p ercent and potassium, sodium, 
calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, or  iron, copper these are prese nt in the significant quantity 
in the tender coconut water. 
Processing of tender coconut water 
 
So, for processing of tender coc onut water, because obviously o nce it is taken out of the 
coconut, tender coconut that it is very, very highly perishable . It will be immediately, that 
oxidized and acted upon by the micro organism et cetera. So, ca re has to be, it has to be properly 
processed and maybe packaged to improve, to help retain its col or and its valuable components 
and also to extend its shell life.  
So, Hurdle technology concept is used. There are two or more hu rdles in combination, could 
effectively restrict browning enzymes and microbial growth whil e maintaining the quality 
during storage because these contents, enzymes and other thing,  its flavor immediately 
oxidizes, enzymatic browning et cetera takes place.  
So, maybe acidification, where asc orbic acid, citric acid, mali c acid or addition of antimicrobial 
additive like potassium metabisulfite or potassium sorbate, the n mild heat treatment, may be 
50 degrees Celsius temperature for about 20 minutes or so, or t wo stage microfiltration, that is, 
using 0.8 micron and 0.45 micron mem branes, and this helps. 
And then microfiltration and finally, packaging in the proper c ontainer laminates et cetera. So, 
that will extend its shelf life. So, the processing steps inclu de collection of tender coconut water 
upgradation, then pasteurization, addition of some antimicrobia l natural, antimicrobial like 
nisin et cetera, at some time they add a sweeteners also, then filtration, and fina lly, packaging.  
 
And in the market, this tender coconut water processed and pack aged, are available in different 
forms which you can see in this figure.  
Coconut milk and cream 
 
Then, coconut milk and cream. Coconut milk refers to the milky fluid that is obtained from 
freshly extracted from the coconut kernel. Coconut cream is the  high fat material obtained from 
the coconut milk by either gra vitational suppression or centrif ugation. So, that is the, after the 
brown skin is removed, it is washed, the kernel, grating and by  mechanical pressing, coconut 
milk is obtained. 
And the depending upon the total solids content, non-fat solids , fat content and pH et cetera, 
that is, pH in all the case ma y be 5.9, but there are total sol ids and non-fat solids and fat, these 
differences, that are the difference. And it makes light coconu t milk, coconut milk, coconut 
cream and coconut cream concentrate. 
Like in the total solids content in the light coconut milk shou ld be minimum 6.6 and maximum 
12.6. Coconut milk should contain minimum 12.7 percent, mass by  mass, their total solids and 
maximum 25.3. So similarly, even c oconut cream 25.4 minimum and  37.3 Maximum. 
Coconut cream concentrate that  37.4 percent of mass bypass mini mum. So, similarly the non-
fat solids also, the light coconut milk about 1.6 percent, coco nut milk 2.7, coconut cream 5.4 
and coconut cream concentrate, 8.4 percent . So, based on this,  various grades of coconut milk 
is produced by the industry. 
Desiccated coconut 
 
Then desiccated coconut, another important product of the cocon ut industry, which is used in 
various, every preparations and even various milk based or such  other, for like, making Laddoo 
or many other products. Desiccate d coconut is the disintegrated , as you can see here in the 
picture, white kernel of the c oconut processed under strict hyg ienic conditions. And it is dried 
to around less than 3 percen t moisture content. 
And for over 70 years, as I told you, it is traditionally expor ted commodity and one of the most 
important commercial products from coconut. As it is made direc tly from the coconut meat, 
desiccated coconut retains the ori ginal oil and the protein of fresh mature coconut. It is a 
commercially found ingredient in the confectionery industry and  many baked food, in 
chocolate, candies or even i ce cream or in many dairy foods. 
 
For making desiccated coconut, see that coconut breaking, inspe cting, scraping, steam 
blanching for 10 minutes, followed by soaking in osmotic agent for 24 hours, then separating 
from osmotic agent and finally, it is dried at 60 degrees Celsi us for 4 to 5 hours in a cabinet 
dryer or in a mechanical drier, cooling and packaging.  
So to sterilize, the meat can be pasteurized at around 80 to 90  degrees Celsius in 2 percent 
sodium metabisulfite solution for 20 minutes. It can also be pa ssed through boiling water or 
subjecting to, subjecting the pie ces to meat to live steam in a  stainless steel blancher at around 
80 degrees Celsius for 5 minutes. The wet meal left after cocon ut milk can also be used to 
prepare low fat desiccated coconut. 
Coconut oil 
 
Then coconut oil, another very, very important product, valuabl e product of the coconut. It is 
generally classified into two categories, one is the virgin coc onut oil commonly known as VCO 
or refined, bleached and deodorized coconut oil, commonly known  as RBD oil. So VCO is a 
clear, high value oil obtained from the fresh mature kernel of coconut through mechanical or 
natural means.  
Whereas the RBD coconut oil is obtained from the copra. So, tha t is the major difference. That 
is, VCO is obtained from the ker nel of the coconut whereas the RBD is obtained from copra. 
Coconut oil is believed to have medical qualities including but  not limited to antifungal, 
antioxidant, antibacterial, antiv iral, hepatoprot ective, low gl ycemic index and immune system 
enhancement.  
It contains around 2.6 to 3 percent less calories as compared t o other fats as it provides various 
health benefits to human body. It helps in controlling blood su gar level as it preserves insulin 
action and insulin resistance. It also helps in preventing live r diseases by reversing 
Hepatosteatosis. 
Coconut oil: Traditional method 
 
In the traditional method, the coconut oil is extracted from co pra, that is, copra can be obtained 
by separating the coconut meat from the whole coconut shell, fo llowed by sun drying and 
smoke drying for about 6 to 8 days, as you can see here in the picture, that is the copra is 
obtained. 
And then this Copra is chopped to a small size and cooked by he ating the small pieces of copra 
in a cooker for about 30 minute. And then this copra was in the  expeller and such other pressers 
is used and it is squeezed out from the copra by an expeller, a nd then filtered by a filter press 
to get the clear oil.  
Virgin coconut oil 
 
So, various other extraction methods, (like) can be used for th e getting the Virgin Coconut oil 
like cold extraction process, where the chilled coconut milk is  used and extracted, solid phase 
then centrifuge to obtain oil. I n the hot extraction process, c oconut milk is heated and then 
passed through a muslin cloth, p ressed through a muslin cloth. 
Then low pressure extraction. In this process, coconut meat is dried and placed into a low 
pressure fabricated manual press, and then sent to the centrifu gal cell to separate oil. In the 
natural fermentation method, hot water is added to the coconut milk, before container is 
converted and left for two days.  
And then oil will separate it and oil is used. Enzymatic extrac tion can also be used, it mixes 
different types of enzymes into the coconut milk and which sepa rate the oil. Centrifugation 
process. Coconut milk is placed in centrifuge and it is centrif uged, the oil is separated, virgin 
oil is obtained.  
Supercritical fluid carbon dioxide. In this process, dried and graded coconut meat is charged 
with continuous flow of supercri tical carbon dioxide and liquid  carbon dioxide and which 
extracts the oil. Expeller pre ssing, very commonly used method where coconut fruit is squeezed 
by the expelling machine, squeeze expelling machines.  
Integrated processing of coconut  milk, oil and desiccated cocon ut 
 
So, here an integrated processing line for coconut for manufact uring coconut milk, coconut oil 
both virgin oil and RBD oil and then desiccated coconut. So, yo u see the raw material is 
dehusked and the husk can be used for coir fiber/ rope and coco peat making. So after dehusking 
the coconut obtained, it is subje cted to shell removing and thi s shell can be used for making 
activated charcoal et cetera. 
Then deshelled material, coconut, then it is subjected to testa  removing where coconut fruit is 
obtained. This coconut fruit is m ay be, converted into coconut water. That is, it can be used in 
soft drinks or coconut. And then again, coconut fruit is desicc ated and after that HF coconut 
powder, and it is a coconut powder, it can be used for milk ext raction, clarifier, centrifugation, 
and finally virgin coconut oil or milk drink that is the tetra pack, they are using this, or even 
HF coconut powder, that is milk extraction. 
This milk can be concentrated earlier of coconut powder then dr yer then LFDC or HFDC that 
this high fat desiccat ed coconut powder or l ow fat desiccated c oconut powder. So, basically in 
this process you will see HFDC, LFDC, VCO, milk drink, vinegar,  soft drink, coconut water, 
these are the various types of product. So, in the integrated u nit, all these. And yellow line 
shows the processing system. And t his green line shows the end products for sale.  
Nata de coco 
 
Then, Nata de coco. That Nata de coco is a gelatinous desert wi th a clear smooth and chewy 
texture. It is composed of cellulose produced by the action of acidic medium called Acetobacter 
xylinum  on coconut water or diluted coconut milk. See here, in the pic ture that is the Nata de 
coco, these cubes. 
Nata from the fresh liquid endosperm of the matured coconut is collected and filtered by using 
cheese cloth. It is then pasteurized after adding 8 percent suc rose, about 0.5 percent ammonium 
sulphate and adjusting the pH to a level of 4.5 by adding aceti c acid. The medium is developed 
by inoculating Acetobacter acetii  at 10 percent, and incubated at room temperature for about 
two weeks. 
After two weeks, a gel like ma ss is developed with film like la yer on the top. This film is then 
removed and the mass is cleaned and cut into cubes. And these c ubes, which are known as Nata 
are further processed to impr ove the color, flavor and taste by  soaking it in the sugar syrup. 
Coconut Industry 
 
Now, let us see coconut industry.  In fact, India accounts for a bout 22.34 percent of the total 
world’s coconut production. And it  is one of the major player i n the world coconut market. 
Coconut, currently the crop grow n is 1.91 million hectare with an annual production of nearly 
13,000 million tonnes. But nearly 90 percent of the total produ ction is only mainly from the 
southern part, southern states, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra. Coconut industry, 
however, is a very, very labor i ntensive industry. It alleviate s poverty and generates 
employment, especially among the weaker section of the society.   
Coconut Industry: Strengths and Potential 
 
So, strengths and potentials of coconut industry that as I told  you, India ranks first in the 
coconut productivity and contribute s more than 30 percent of th e world production. Despite 
all, almost all the coconut pr oduced in the country is consumed  domestically. So, there is a big 
potential to boost export, export of the coconut. 50 percent of  the total coconut production is 
used for copra and coconut, 15 percent for tender coconut, and only 10 percent for other 
products. Presence of India in th e international trade of the c oconut is negligible at present. The 
coconut sector has the potential for growth both in the domesti c as well as in the overseas 
trades.  
Constraints facing coconut industry 
Constraints faced by the coconut  farmers in producing coconut 
 
But there are certain constrain ts faced by the coconut processi ng industry both by the farmers 
as well as, the transport, marketing like pest and disease inci dents, nutrient deficiency, high 
labor cost, lack of institutional support or lack of availabili ty of the good seedlings or non-
adoption of the scientific cultiv ation practices. These are som e of the major constraints facing 
the farmers. 
Constraints faced by the farm ers in marketing of coconut 
 
And then, that is a constraints faced by the farmers in marketi ng a coconut, like high prices 
coconut price fluctuation, price driven by the demand of the oi l, limited market information on 
price or inefficient functioning  of the regulated market, high transport cost or inadequate 
storage facility, et cetera.  
Constraints faced by processors 
 
Even the constraints faced by the processors like low capacity utilization, high price 
fluctuation, inconsistent supply of raw material, lack of insti tutional support with respect to 
promotion of coconut or lack of institutional support with resp ect to credit, et cetera. So, these 
are the some of the constraints. And I think this is a, coconut  industry is a very, this is a very 
important crop, and every possible effort should be done to boo st its export as well as 
processing and value added product promotion.  
Cashew nuts 
 
So, now let us discuss the another important commercial crop, t hat is the cashewnut, the 
cashewnut processing. Cashewnut is made up of a fruit in which the kernel is embedded. You 
can see here in the figure, the nut is composed of kernel and p ericarp or shell. The kernel is 
slightly curved back on itself and forms two cotyledons. Here, this is the kernel. That is a 
kernel, two cotyledons, about  20 to 50 percent of the nuts weig ht 
The kernel is wrapped in a thin, difficult to remove peel which  is called testa, reddish-brown 
membrane, which in turn is approximate to about 5 percent of th e whole nut. So, in actual 
processing, that is, so it is tw o parts, that is, one is the ca shew apple and the  other is nuts. And 
both, the cashew apple is the t he pseudo fruit or a swollen hyp ocarp. And both, these both 
components are important part. 
Cashew Processing 
 
So, in the case of cashew processing, there are different steps  which are used for cashew 
processing. After this, cashew nuts are obtained from the tree,  raw cashew, see how does it 
look like in the figure. Then, it is subjected to boiling where  raw cashews are steamed under 
pressure to soften the shell. And this causes the cashew inside  to become loose and easier to 
remove, it becomes easy to remove it from it. And then next ope ration is cutting, that is outer 
covering testa et cetera is removed.  
Cashew shell is split open longi tudinally, and the cashew insid e is immediately taken out by 
hand or by hand implements. Then this is next subjected to dryi ng. The skin on the cashews is 
dried in the oven at low heat for a few hours to loosen the ski n so that the skin covering, it 
becomes soft, it loses out. So, dried kernels, you can see in t he figure. So, these dried kernels. 
The next step is humidifier. H umidifier operation is done to ma ke the kernel up to around 4 to 
5 percent moisture conditioning or better peeling of the skin.  
So, this humidity, drying and af ter drying, it in humidifier. S o it improves the, it makes it better 
for the cleaning operation removal of the outer shells et ceter a. So, after that, like the peeling 
operation, the skin of each cashew is removed by the machine, a nd the cashew is 
simultaneously visually graded according to the quality. So see  t h e s e  a r e  p e e l e d  c a s h e w  
kernels, you can see here in the figure. And these are the also , the machines that we have shown 
here, that is, these cashew nut p eeling machines are also avail able in the market.  
Then finally, grading. The whole cashew kernels are individuall y graded by machine according 
to the count per pound, that is pe r kg or what is the count of the kernel part, accordingly grade 
1, grade 2, grade 3 is given, that is kernel grades. There are automatic graders machines. So, 
humidifier, grading. So processing step you can see finally, st eam boiling and cooking, then 
cashew shell cutting, electrical drying, then humidifying, cash ew nut peeling and then finally, 
grading.  
Machinery for cashew processing  
 
The machinery required for cashew nut processing, you can see h ere. Raw cashew nut pre-
cleaning and de-stoni ng and then sizing. Then the steam boiler and other cooking vessels are 
shown in picture. Then sheller w ith vibratory sieve and color s orter, and steam humidity 
chamber, that inside that materi al after drying is kept and the n humid steam is used, is spread. 
Then finally, pneumatic peeling machine with an air compressor and optical color sorter. So, 
these are the common machinery w hich is used in the cashew proc essing plant.  
Cashew nut milk processing 
 
So, here it is a process flowchart which is soon the cashew nut  milk processing where the 
cashew nut bubbles are taken, the cashew nuts, this is sent to the washing machine, elevator, 
then cashew nut soaking tank, cashew nut tank roasting, it is r oasted and then finally the cashew 
nut is shelling. So shelled cashew nut, it may be here, dischar ged to conveyor or cashew nut, 
shelled cashew is made, that cashew nut liquid.  
So, kernel then it is sent to drying machine, cashew kernel pee ling, kernel washing and then 
after washed kernel, with the help of elevator, is sent to the colloid mill. In the colloid mill 
where it is a finely ground in the form of paste, vibrate feed is filtered, cashew nut milk pulp 
and the blending tank. Here this colloidally grounds milk pump is obtained in. And then sugar, 
emulsifier other flavors et cetera is added, it is mixed here. Even RO water. All these things 
are blended.  
It is sent to the, through the  milk pump, homogenization, and t hen pasteurizer, UHT sterilizer, 
then milk degasser. It is subjected to buffer tank, bottle can filters or retort sterilizer to get 
cashewnut milk, packaging. It is packed properly in the tetrapa ck. After milk degasser, it can 
also be seen for the cartoon filling machine or stock. So, thes e are the different steps, operation, 
steps involved in preparation of cashew nut milk, starting from  the cashew nut, and finally you 
get the bottled milk, as you can see. 
Cashew apple juice processing 
 
Then cashew apple juice processing, another very, very importan t, the cashew apple which is 
obtained. It is made, that is the cashew apple in crates is tak en, bubble washer and elevator, it 
is in washed, and then after thorough washing, then the cashew apple is sent to the crusher, 
crushed, and then buffer tank where  belt press juice extractor.   
So, the from the cashew apple juice is extracted and pomace et cetera pomace is there, the 
pomace is then sent for various, to make concentrated cashew ap ple juice, NFC cashew, apple 
juice or cashew apple cider, beverage et cetera. These are all made. This can also be made after 
this RO water et cetera is added. And then it is also then sent  for the alcoholic fermentation, 
alcoholic fermentation. And with t he alcoholic fermentation the n acetic fermentation.  
You see that in the figure, it is  a feni, very, very important product which is available in the 
Goa. That is a, feni is a very, very popular product, very popu lar beverage, alcoholic beverage, 
beverage which is having characteristic flavour. And it is prep ared from the cashew apple. 
Then, these are the some of the products that is various other product like cashew apple cider, 
vinegar, NFC cashew apple juice, concentrated cashew apple juic e et cetera. These different 
products are made from the cashew apple.  
Recent developments in cashew processing 
Cold processing of cashew 
 
Then, only there are certain recent development in the cashew p rocessing, because the cold 
processing of the cashew is heard, that is UV and IR sanitation  system, that is kernels are passed 
through IR or UV sanitizing system  to eliminate any infestation  in kernels and ensuring log 
reduction of harmful bact erial viral load.  
Then in cold plasma processing the cashew nuts are processed by  low pressure plasma using 
glow discharge method, that is, which increases the kernel oil and anacrardic acid content. In 
the U.S. and ultrasound and ozone treatment processing, it incr eases the bioactive content in 
the cashew apple juice. The synergy between ultra sound and ozo ne takes place in the juice and 
makes the juice microbiologica lly stable. And it has high flavo noid content. 
Summary 
 
So, what I can summarize that yes, both coconut and cashew proc essing, these both the products 
are very important. The coconut is a, first this coconut is tak en and then primary processing 
operation but however, there is a need for mechanization of the  coconut industry. So, this atleast 
coconut pluckers are getting the harvesting the coconut foods f rom the long bunches of the 
plant, there should be some mech anical harvester, need to be de veloped. Some institutions are 
working on it, but still lot of, l ot more work is to be done.  
Cashewnut processing, that is, it is an important industry and various products of the 
cashewnut, both apple and cashew nut products are prepared. And they are available in the 
market. But still lot is required to be done in both these prod ucts. The coconut, as I told, that 
majority of the coconut is still  produced in the country is use d domestically and where it has a 
lot of potential. So, efforts should were made to boost the exp ort of the coconut. 
References 
 
 
With this , I come to the end of this lecture. These are the re ferences which have been used in 
this. Thank you very much for your patient hearing. Thank you. 
 
