Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation  
Crop Products  
Professor H N Mishra  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 56  
Green Technologies and Near Zero Waste Processing  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:21)  
 
Hello everyone, namaskar. Now, we will discuss about various as pects of green technologies, 
by-products and waste utilization. In today's lecture, we will discuss the green technology and 
near zero waste processing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46) 
 
The concept that we will be covered include an overview of gree n technology, novel green  
processing and extraction techni ques, near zero waste managemen t, and waste utilization in 
fruits and vegetable sector.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:04)  
 
 
The goals of green technology are:  Sustainability:  meeting the needs of society without depleting  the natural sources, source 
reduction: reducing waste and pollution by changing patterns of  production    a n d  
consumption, “cradle to cradle ” design: creatin g products that can be fully reclaimed or re-
used, innovation: developing alternatives to technologies that damage health and the 
environment, and viability: creating a center of economic activ ity around green technology 
(Investment, career opportunities). 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:26)  
 
Application of green technologies in food sector aims to reduce  energy use, reduce 
environmental foot print, reduce process-induced toxins in food s, reduce waste generation, 
and alternative and sustainable process for analytical and proc essing purpose 
 (Refer Slide Time: 03:07)  
 
Eco-designing in food processing: 
Purpose of eco-design is to prev ent or ‘design out’ adverse env ironmental impacts throughout 
the life cycle of products or ser vice systems. This involves en vironmental friendly raw 
materials, efficient use of raw m aterials, cleaner production o ptions, optimization of 
packaging, effective distribution system,  and environmentally sound use of products. The eco 
design cycle include primary production, processing, packaging and distribution, use phase 
and end of life. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 04:50)  
 
 
The novel green processing technologies, that is high pressure processing, pulsed electric 
field, pulsed light, Ohmic heating, ultrasound processing, cold  plasma treatment, membrane  
processing, microwave processing, ultraviolet treatment, are co nsidered to be green 
technologies because these technologies normally aim to achieve  food products rich in health 
promoted components with appropriate shelf life and fulfill the  market requirement of garden 
fresh and natural-like food products. They also play crucial ro le in product innovation, 
produce sophisticated and diverse food products. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:56)  
 
 
Pulsed light (PL) is based on the application of short time lig ht pulses with an intense broad 
spectrum. These pulses act inactivating the microorganisms at a  surface level of food and the 
packaging material. Microbial DNA absorbs UV light which leads physico-chemical changes 
in its structure, thus resulting in damage of genetic informati on, impaired replication and gene 
transcription as well as eventual death of the cell. PL treatme nt employs 1–20 flashes/second 
with an energy density ranging from 0.01 to 50 J/cm2 at the surface and it has potential 
application in food processes re quiring a rapid disinfection.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 07:08)  
 
 
Ohmic heating processing: 
The basic principle of OH is given by the passage of alternatin g electric current (AC) via two 
electrodes inserted in the food.  The electrical energy conducte d through the food is converted 
into thermal energy due to the el ectrical resistance of the foo d (phenomenon known as Joule 
effect), leading to a volumetric and instantaneous heating. The  effectiveness of the process is 
strictly related to OH rate, whic h depends on the electric fiel d and the electrical conductivity 
of the product. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:54) 
 
Cold plasma technology: 
Cold plasma is composed of positi ve and negative charged ions, electrons, and charged 
particles generated by an electri c discharge of different gases , such as argon (Ar), helium 
(He), nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), and atmospheric air. The chemic al species generated by the 
plasma discharging in air (reac tive oxygen and nitrogen, energe tic ions, and charged particles) 
promote the sanitizing technology in the field of food processi ng vide the inactivation effect 
against the pathogenic microorganisms. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 08:31)  
 
 
Benefits of green processing: Eliminate the local use of boilers or steam generation systems,  avoid the use of non-renewable 
energy resources, like fossil fuels, it has good energy efficie ncy, water savings and reduced 
emissions (environmental friendly), maintain the integrity of p hytochemicals & retains the 
nutritional quality of  fruits and vegetable, inactivate oxidat ive enzymes & minimize 
browning, and  minimal impact on color, flavor & volatile aroma  compounds. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 09:27)  
 
Emerging green extraction techniques  
What is the green extraction technique? It aims to increase the  extraction yield, extraction 
quality, extract  purity, etc and lower down the extraction tim e, amount of solvent required for 
extraction, energy  consumption, environmental impact, economic  cost, waste generated, etc. 
The properties of the recovered product using green technology have more naturalness, safety, 
quality, purity, and functionality.  
Various advanced extraction techniques include supercritical fl uid extraction, subcritical 
water extraction, pressurized liquids, microwave assisted extra ction, ultra sound assisted 
extraction, enzyme assisted extraction, and pulse electric fiel d. The solvents used are water, 
supercritical fluids, then ionic liquids, deep eutectic or natu ral deep eutectic and even bio-
based solvents. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:17)  
 
High pressure extraction: 
High-pressure-assisted extraction (HPE) is an environment-frien dly extraction technology that 
can destroy the cell walls, membranes, and organelles of plant tissues, which also enhances 
the mass transfer process, increas es extraction efficiency, red uces extraction time, and 
decreases solvent consumption. Currently, the range of pressure  in industrial use is between 
100 and 600 MPa, which is determined by the processed products.  In other words, pressure 
transmission is uniform, instantaneous, and adiabatic, which im plies it can be applied 
regardless of food shape or size. Studies have examined the ext raction of functional 
ingredients from food wastes, such as lycopene from tomato past e, anthocyanins from grape 
skins, and corilagin from longan fruit pericarp.   
(Refer Slide Time: 12:45)  
 
Electric field versus ultrasound assisted extraction of polyphe nols:  
Here the freeze-dried blueberry pomace is taken and subjected t o either pulsed electric field 
structure or high voltage elect ric discharge method or ultrasou nd assisted extraction. In the 
ultrasound assisted extraction, the pomace powder is put into s ome liquid solvent inside the 
ultrasonic transducer. The extraction efficiency increases due to the principle of acoustic 
cavitation where, compaction and refraction, the time and press ure and the extraction rate is 
present. In the case of High voltage electrical discharges (HVE D), commodity is kept in the 
plate electrode or needle electrode. The fluctuation in HVED th at is how extraction pulse 
shapes can be observed in the figure.  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:03)  
 
 
The mechanism of action basica lly irreversible e lectroporation,  that is, when you are applying 
the electric field, then this cells are damaged, ruptured and p ores are created, either existing 
pores are  enlarged, or new pores are created.  The cellular co mponents flow to outside of 
cells. The solvent present in outer side penetrates into the ce ll and this releases polyphenolic 
components and cellular material . Finally, the extract componen t is obtained.  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 15:04)  
 
 
High voltage electric discharge: 
 
In this technique, energy is introduced directly into an aqueou s solution through a plasma 
channel formed by a current of high-voltage electrical discharg e  b e t w e e n  t w o  s u b m e r g e d  
electrodes. The intensity of the electric field is able to indu ce an avalanche of electrons that 
are responsible for starting the spread of the positive streame r for the negative electrode. 
Secondary phenomena, such as bubble cavitation, turbulence, and  pressure shock waves, 
contribute to the improvement of cell damage, facilitating the release of compounds and the 
extraction of biomolecules from the cytoplasm of the cells.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:59)  
 
 
Membrane separation: 
The fruit or vegetable or other sample is given physical treatm ent like washing, drying, then 
taken for extraction and then extract is subjected to isolation  and purification either using 
microfiltration, ultrafiltration, nanofiltration or reverse osm osis which are the known 
technologies.  
Membrane assisted sol vent extraction: 
An extraction vial with a cap, funnel and membrane bag, is used  to obtain the non polar 
solvent at elevated temperatures followed by agitation (separat ion of aqueous and organic 
phase) and finally larger volume injection is done to easily se parate the polyphenolic 
compounds.  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:24)  
 
 
Enzyme assisted extraction: 
 It works on the principle that addition of an enzyme leads to enzymatic hydrolysis, resulting 
in faster cell wall breakage. T he food dried sample is taken af ter pre-treatment for enzyme 
hydrolysis where the  matrix cell wall disruption due to enzyma tic reaction occurs which in 
turn release the polyphenolic compounds from the food matrix. R emoval of aqueous part is 
then done by filtration followed by purification of polyphenols  then finally, the concentrated 
polyphenolic extract is obtained. For total phenolic extraction , the enzymes used are:  
Chokeberry pomace  Viscozyme L, Cellustar XL, Grape pomace  Cellulase, tannase, 
Guava leaves  cellulase, Xylanase, and Citrus peel  Viscozyme L. 
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:01)  
 
 
Combined technology: 
From the plant source, the sample preparation is done for the e xtraction procedures, where, 
weighted samples are put into ve ssels; extraction solvent is ad ded along with enzyme addition 
before subjecting it to micro wav e and ultra s ound radiation. T he system is then turned off and 
allowed to cool down followed by clean up procedures, post-trea tments and analysis. Several 
emerging techniques applied to extraction can be combined to re duce the number of stages, 
the extraction time and thus the energy consumption. Combinatio n of the novel extraction 
technologies for synergistic eff ects can minimize the degradati on and enhance extraction. 
Combinations of US-assisted enzym atic extraction (UAEE), MW-ass isted                       
enzymatic extraction (MAEE) and US & MW-assisted extraction (UM AE), can                       
exhibit higher potentia l extraction ability. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:06)  
 
 
Near zero waste management: 
Food processing waste after filt ration is of two types: liquid and solid wastes. The organic 
wastes and solid biodegradable waste are taken for enzyme treat ment/ SCF, MW extraction 
bioactive compounds, to obtain the bioactives and compost. Howe ver, the liquid waste is 
taken for anaerobic treatment, membrane filtration to obtain th e compost on one side and the 
other part is ozoni zed for the reuse. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:08)  
 
Waste management: 
Waste utilization involve the bio refineries, bio-ethanol produc tion, lignocellulose as biofuels, 
natural fibers in concrete, and thermal and acoustic insulators . merits of waste utilization 
include higher costs of unprocesse d waste disposal, potential s ource of reusable energy, 
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and chemical oxygen demand (COD ), and potential raw 
ingredient for commercial fermentation industry. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:32)  
 
 
Food supply chain waste is mainly plant derived or animal deriv ed. Particularly the plant 
derived waste material are subject to  extraction and processin g technology where, various 
molecule like lipids, hemicellulose, bio actives, pectin, starc h, phytochemical, phenols etc can 
be made or by incineration we  can get fly ash and hydrogels. F rom pretreatment and 
hydrolysis one can get sugars, which can be fermented to obtain  products like bio ethanol, 
butanol, enzymes etc. Anaerobic digestion can be used for obtai ning the heat, power, 
biofertilizers, etc. These are the some of the main commercial value products can be obtained 
from these wastes. Similarly, Animal derived waste after extrac tion can give us collagen, 
chitosan, protein hydolysate, bioactiv e peptides, insecticides and therapeutic enzymes tc. 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:16)  
 
 
Waste product utilization: 
Byproduct of fruit and vegetable industries are pomace, oil cak es, peels, stalks, seeds and 
stones. They are often rich in Fiber, Phytochemicals, Polypheno ls, Flavonoids, Organic acids, 
Vitamins, Minerals and exhibits various important properties su ch as Anti-oxidant, Anti-
microbial, Anti-cancer, Anti-cardio vascular, Anti-oxidative , I mmune-modulatory  effects. 
The extracts and powders could be used in Nutraceuticals, Funct ional foods, Food 
fortification, Natural preservatives, Bio-pigments, Edible oil,  Chemical industries, Animal 
feed, Biofuels, etc. 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:29)  
 
 
Exploitation of F&V industry/suppl y chain wastes for high-value  products: 
Re-processing of fruit & vegetable wastes 
Sweet potato, banana skin, orange peel, mango waste and pineapp l e  p e e l  a r e  u s e d  f o r  t h e  
preparation of single cell protein; Pineapple waste, banana was te are used for bioethanol 
formation; Banana peel can be used for fibre generation; Orange  p e e l  i s  u s e d  t o  p r e p a r e  
Protease, Apocarotenoid, Limonene; Potato peel is used for xant han formation; Guava, 
pomegranate and pineapple wast e forms phenolics; Apple pomace h elps in Polyphenols, 
Antioxidants formation; Tomato waste is used to extract Lycopen e (from pomace), 
carotenoids (from skin).  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:41)  
 
 
Similarly, the fruits and vegetable they can also be exploited for making packaging  materials 
from the peels, skin leaf, kernel, pomace etc. After the bioact ive extraction, the residue which 
is coming can be used for renewal and bio-degradable biopolymer s, composite film with good 
instability and barrier properties, and active films as carrier  of antioxidant, antimicrobial 
properties. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 29:35) 
 
Case studies: Waste utilization in  fruits and vegetable sector 
 
This case study represents the waste utilization in fruits and vegetable sector. Utilization of 
peanut processing waste involves the collection of spray dried powder of peanut skin & hulls 
was mixed with sugar syrup, peanut  snack bar was coated with th e syrup solution, it was 
found that antioxidant content of  the snack bar increased bitte rness and astringency was 
reduced and aroma was improved. Similarly, the fortification of  mango kernel powder in 
cookies improved its nutritional,  textural and sensory qualitie s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:42)  
 
 
Utilization of apple processing waste: 
Apple pomace is rich in dietary  fibres/carbohydrates and phytoc hemicals and are utilized for 
the production of bioethanol, pectin, fibre concentrate, hemice lluloses, oligosaccharides, 
cellulose, and phenolic extract, which are further used for the  production of functional foods, 
food ingredients, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, polymers etc. 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:32)  
 
 
Utilization of grape processing waste: 
The grape pomace is rich in Antioxidant & antimicrobial and can  be Incorporated in cereal 
products to increase phenol content. Grape seed oil is rich in tocopherol & tannins and Used 
to replace animal fat in products like sausages. Grape peels ar e rich in resveratrol, polyphenol 
& tartaric acid which can be incorporated with tea leaves to in crease phenol content and used 
as natural antioxidant in oil. 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 32:35)  
 
 
Summary: 
Green technologies are clean tec hnologies which cause minimal o r no effect on the 
environment. Reduction in energy consumption, reduced waste gen eration, by product 
utilization are the aim of green technologies in food industry.  Emerging green extraction 
technologies are high pressure e xtraction, supercritical fluid extraction, electric  field-assisted 
extraction, ultrasonication assist ed extraction, combined techn iques. Zero discharge waste 
management aims to produce no waste and utilize the solid and l iquid waste generated to 
produce other value added products.  
(Refer Slide Time: 34:30) 
 
 
 So, this is all. These are the ref erences used in this lecture.   
(Refer Slide Time: 34:35)  
 
Thank you very much for your time. 
