Post Harvest Operations and Processing of Fruits, Vegetables,  
Spices and Plantation Crop Products  
Professor H.N. Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 53  
Edible coatings & films  
The concepts covered in this lecture are definition of edible coatings and the need for such 
packaging, its mechanism of action, materials used for formation of coatings and films, and 
methods of coating and film application. Final ly, few case studies of coating of fruits and 
vegetables edible coating is discussed.  
Edible coating  
 
Primary purpose of food coating is to provide a barrier to microorganisms, to moisture, to gas 
and to solute migration in food.  Edible coating is normally applied on food surface where a                       
thin layer of edible film is formed directly on surfaces or between different layers.  Usually, it 
is desirable that the coating should be edible, so the coated food could be d irectly eaten, but this 
is not a definite requirement.  One of the most well -known coating procedures is the wax coating 
on fruits and vegetables, adopted to keep the product fresh, avoiding over ripening and moisture 
loss.  
Edible films  
 
Edible films are a thin layer of material coated or wrapped around a food product to act as a 
barrier to the surrounding environment. They serve as carriers of natural or chemical 
antimicrobial agents, antioxidants, enzymes, vitamins, or minerals. The term edible  films and 
edible coatings are referred as synonyms.  Films are pre -formed separately and applied to food 
surface or sealed into edible pouches.  Coatings are formed directly onto food surface . 
The figure provided shows that edible polymer matrix and plastic izer are blended and 
homogenized and degassed. The mixture is poured on a thin plate or surface and dried . The thin 
edible film obtained can be used for wrapping of meat, fruits and vegetables. Other process is 
to directly dip the product in the homogenize d mixture to form a coating on the product.  
 
Edible coating and film uses 
Edible coating and film could be consumed along with the packed food. It is a green technology 
as it reduces environmental pollution. It extends the self -life of the food by the in hibition of the 
microbial growth, and by the improvement of the quality of food system.  It controls the 
diffusion rate of preservative substances from the surface  to the interior of the food. It preserves 
bioactive nutrients  and inhibits oxidation  by inhib ition of gas transfer.  It preserves 
phytochemicals  (texture, color)  and organoleptic properties of food . It protects probiotic 
bacteria viability . It could be used as carrier for  anti-microbial or anti -oxidant agents. It could 
be used in multilayer food packaging materials.   
Mechanism of action of edible coating  
 
The thin layer of edible coating is made on the surface of the tomato by wrapping and sealing 
or by using appropriate method direct very thin transparent film is made on it. Edible coating 
provides barrier properties against moisture, oxygen, carbon dioxid e, aroma, etc. It protects the 
product against contaminating microbes. It improves the appearance of the produce by 
providing gloss to the product.  The film could carry functional ingredients such as 
antimicrobial, antioxidants and emulsifiers. It could im prove the texture by providing flexibility 
and elasticity. The edible films are safe, bio -degradable, and nontoxic.  
Thus, the main mechanism of action of the edible film is to provide barrier property against 
moisture, oxygen, and microbial agents. It reg ulates the in and out of gases from the food and 
into the food thereby, it controls the undesirable reactions, processes even including respiration 
and the self -life of the food is increased.   
Drivers for edible coating innovations  
The drivers for the edible coating innovations include increasing consumer demand for RTE 
foods and fewer or no additive based  food preservation.  Environmental issues such as recycling 
and biodegradability of conventional packaging films.  Changes in the re tail and distribution 
practices associated with globalization.  Stricter regulatory requirements regarding consumer 
health and safety.   
Edible coating requirements  
The requirements of the edible coating films are that it should have stability under high rel ative 
humidity . It should have good water  vapor barrier properties, efficient oxygen and carbon 
dioxide barrier properties and should have good mechanical properties . It should have better  
adhesion to the fruit.  
The edible coating should be pleasant to taste and should not interfere with the organoleptic 
property of the food produce. It should be colorless, and tasteless. It should have 
physiochemical and microbiological stability. The cost should be economical, v iable,  and 
cheaper. The material used should have GRAS status.  
Active edible coating   
The active edible coating refers to the incorporation of functional additives or extracts from 
natural sources such as antimicrobials, antioxidants, etc. into the coating systems to Improve 
functionality of the edible films increase the shelf life of foods , provide a high -quality p roduct 
(fresh / safe) . The non -active coating as shown in the figure provides barrier properties alone 
such as controls respiration rate by allowing oxygen and carbon dioxide transfer, ethylene gas 
transfer and prevents transfer of water vapor. The active coating along with providing barrier 
properties, also contains actives such as antimicrobials like antibacterial and antifungal 
components and antioxidant additives.  
Raw materials used for edible coatings and films  
Raw materials that are used for making coatings and films  may be polysaccharides , protein , or 
lipids . The polysaccharides used may be  alginate, chitosan, gum arabic, pectin etc.  It also 
includes s tarches like potato  starch , corn starch, pea starch , acorn starch etc. The c ellulose 
derivative s such as  carboxymethylcellulose, methyl cellulose , hydroxyethyl cellulose, hydroxy 
methylcellulose, etc are also used. In case of protein -based coatings or films, pro teins like 
gelatin, casein, zein, peanut  protein, soyabean protein, whey  protein  and whey pro tein isolate 
are used. L ipids like resins, fatty acids, edible waxes  such as carnauba and bees wax are also 
used as coating material. A dditives like crosslinking  agents , emulsifiers  (Tween) and 
plasticizers like glycol are used to get  a stable emulsion  with the solvents. The solvents used 
are water,  ethanol, ac etic acid, etc.  
Ingredients for edible coating  
The ingredients may be a fruit or vegetable extract, which consists of water pectin, dietary fibre, 
lipids, phytochemicals, pigment, and phenolic compounds. Plasticizer like sugar, glycerol, and 
sorbitol. Plasticizer content must be controlled, as it promo tes reduced brittleness and stiffness, 
increased flexibility, stretchability, and toughness, which are all desirable, but it also impairs 
some film. barrier properties. Binding agents like edible hydrocolloids are used to improve 
consistency, mechanical st rength, and barrier properties. Functional additives are used to 
improve sensory, nutritional, antimicrobial and antioxidant properties.  
Selecting edible coating materials  
 
If coating is too thick, detrimental effect can result because internal gas concentration is below 
a desirable and beneficial level and there is an associated increase in CO 2 concentration which 
is above a critical level. These conditions lead to anaerobic fermentation.  
This can be remedied by developing several edible coatings , controlling the wettability of the 
edible coating, measuring gas permeation properties of selected coatings , measuring diffusion 
properties of skin & flesh of selected fruits  in which coating is to be applied, predicting internal 
gas compositions for the coated fruits  and finally, observing effect s of this coating on quality 
changes of the  coated fruits and vegetables.  
Methods for edible coating  
 
The common methods used for edible coating are dipping , brushing , spraying , or wrapping. 
Some  other method s like fluidized bed coating as well as pan coating or panning are also used.  
The process of dipping, brushing, spraying, and wrapping are shown in the figures provided.  
Spray technology of coating application  
The spray technology of coating  application consist s of a set of nozzles used in the formation 
of the droplets , sprayer tank to facilitate liquid pressure , heating jacket nozzle for temperature 
control of the liquid before injection , conveyor belts to move the products , data logger to c ontrol 
physical parameters such as pressure, temperature (ambient air, liquids), flow rates, and liquid 
level for the sprayer tank . The air system to participate in both the production of droplets in the 
nozzle and the circulation of the liquid flow.  The figure shows the coating of orange by 
spraying. The uncoated oranges are passed under spray gun through a conveyor. As it passes 
under the spray gun, its sprayed and coated with the edible film coating.  
Basic installation for spray coating in food engineering  
The figure provided shows the basic installation for spray coating system. The figure shows a 
sprayer tank  with the homogenized emulsion to form the coating material . The material is 
pumped into the spray nozzle via liquid shutoff  valve, liquid strainer and liquid regulator and 
gauge. A  a calculated and controlled amount of the emulsion flows  to the sprayer nozzle, 
through this nozzle it is sprayed over the  food material on a conveyor belt.  To ensure uniform 
coating of the food pr oducts the spray system consists of air shutoff valve and air regulator 
gauge. The air enters through the air inlet and filtered before entering the nozzle. Spraying 
pattern improves with increase in operating pressure and fluid temperature, while it deter iorates 
with increase of fluid viscosity.  
Fluidized bed coating  
Fluidized -bed coating process consists of  a coating material, either in the form of a solution or 
suspension , a set of nozzles to spray the coating materials onto the surface of fluidized powders  
to form a shell -type structure.  The figure shows the types of fluidized bed coating, that are top 
spray fluidized bed coating, bottom spray fluidized bed coating, and tang ential spray fluidized 
bed coating.  
In case of top spray dried fluidized bed coating, the fruits,  or vegetable s, which is to be coated 
is fluidized in the air and coating solution is spread from the top .  In case of the bottom and 
tangential fluidized bed coating, the coating material is applied from middle and from a 
tangential direction, respectively. Top spray met hod is more popular in food industry.  
Pan coating  
Pan coating process consists of depositing the product to be coated into a large, rotating bowl, 
referred to as the pan. The coating solution is then ladled or sprayed into the rotating pan. The 
produc  t is tumbled within the pan to evenly distribute the coating solution over the surface of 
the food material. Forced air, either ambient or at elevated temperature, is applied to dry the 
coating. The figure provided shows representation of a typical pan coating process.  The nozzle 
is used to sp ray the coating material inside the pan and excess air removed via air exhaust.  
Composite coating  
Multi -component or composite coatings are usually made to explore the complementary 
advantages of each component as well as to minimize the disadvantages. Mo st composite 
coatings associate a hydrophobic compound (lipids) and a hydrophilic structural matrix. 
Composite film and coatings can be produced in two ways namely bi -layer composite film and 
emulsion composite film. In bi -layer composite film, the lipid f orms a second layer over the 
polysaccharide or protein. In emulsion composite film, the lipid is dispersed and entrapped in 
the supporting biopolymer matrix.  The figure depicts the process of composite coating, the fruit 
or produce to be coated is dipped i nto the coating material and washed and then again dipped, 
this process is repeated till a multilayer of the coating material is formed.  
Methods for edible film 
Two methods are used for  formation of the edible film, there are solvent casting known as wet 
method or extrusion known as dry method. The wet method involves the dispersion or 
solubilization of the polymers in a solvent medium prior to film formation. The film forming 
ingredient s are mixed to form a homogeneous solution and the film is formed by layer -by-layer  
deposition method in the laboratory scale or smaller scale. In industry, the film dope is poured 
into a thin layer on a moving conveyor and dried by appl ying air over the f ilm. The dried film 
is finally rolled into a film roll. The dry method involves hot -press molding or melt extrusion 
processes of powdered polymers.  The figure shows extrusion, thermoforming and injection 
molding of the films. In thermoforming the polymer p owder are passed through an extruder and 
the screw pushes the molten mass through a die. The hot film is pressed by a positive mold and 
vacuum is applied on other side to form the shape. In injection molding, the extruded film is 
injected into a mold and t he shape is formed.  
Gas permeation properties of edible coatings  
The permeability of oxygen, carbon dioxide and water vapor can be calculated as,  
𝑃=𝑄𝑋
(𝐴𝑡∆𝑝) 
Where, P is permeability (g or ml m /sq m/s/Pa),  A is the area of film (sq m),  t   is time (s), Δp 
is partial pressure difference of the gases (Pa) across film, and X is thickness of the film (m). 
Success of edible coatings for fruits & vegetables depends mainly on selecting films or coatings 
which can give a desirable gas compositio n that is appropriate for a specific product.  
Wettability and coating effectiveness  
Effectiveness of EC depends primarily on controlling the wettability of the coating solutions 
which affects the coating thickness of the film. EC formulations must be wet &  spread on the 
fruit surface uniformly and upon drying form a coating that has adequate adhesion, cohesion 
and durability to function properly.  
 
Wettability of a solid by a liquid is determined by the balance between adhesive forces  (Wa) of 
the liquid on the solids and cohesive forces (Wc) of the liquid. Wa causes  the liquid to spread 
over the solid surface while Wc cause it to shrink. The equilibrium spreading coefficient (Ws)  
is defined as follows and it can  only be negative or zero.  
Ws  = Wa  – Wc = Ysv – Ylv – Ysl 
Where, Ysv, Ylv & Ysl are solid -vapor, liquid -vapor & solid -liquid interfacial tensions.  
Modified chitosan based coating  
The figure shows strawberries coated with modified chitosan based  formulation containing 
limonene and emulsifiers. The coated strawberries retained the color and shape even after 16 
and 21 days compared to the control. The control sample developed mold and got deformed and 
decolored after 10 days. RTE vegetables could b e coated with edible coating which will 
maintain the color, shape and freshness of the vegetables.  
Preparation of edible coating material and its application to tomatoes  
Sodium alginate is added to m illipore water with continuous stirring . It is kept in water bath 
maintained at 72°C for 30 min. The solution has to be stirred regularly util the solution becomes 
clear. Then glycerol should be added and stirred.  This solution forms the dipping solution of 
the coating mate rial. Tomatoes to be coated are washed and dipped  in coating for 5 min, after 
coating the tomatoes are dried at room temperature.  The coated tomatoes are packed in LDPE 
zip locked pouches and stored at 10°C and 90% RH.  
Storage study on coated ripe tomatoes  
The coated tomatoes were stored at 10°C and 90% RH for 48 days and in controlled atmospheric 
unit at 10°C, 90% RH for 65 days. In normal storage the produces were  stored at atmospheric 
condition , while in CA the gas composition of the atmosphere surround ing the produce is 
controlled. At 10°C the EC coated tomatoes remained fresh for 48 days, under CA storage the 
shelf life increased to 65 days. The uncoated tomatoes lost its firmness and color in 15 days of 
storage at 10°C 90% RH.  
Rice starch -ι-carrageenan coating on b anana  
Bananas were coated with rice starch - ι-carrageenan and  their respiration rate, e thylene rate and 
ripening stages were obse rved.  The influence of the coating on the fruit surface characteristics 
through SEM analysis is illustrated in  figure  (b and c). Starch coating uniformly covered the 
pericarp surface without cleavage among epidermal cells, however, some cracks and/or 
cleavage was observed between the cells in non -coated fruits. Starch coating provided more 
uniform coverage onto the fruit surface without any cracks thus slowing down the ripening . The 
results presented in this study demonstrated the efficiency of coating in controlling gas transfer 
rates including atm ospheric oxygen and ethylene production that control respiration and 
maturation in the fruit . Banana pieces were coated with iodine to visualize the breakdown of 
starch to sugars during the ripening process. The figure shows delay in the loss of stain in coated 
bananas s howing that the ripening process is delayed.  
 
 
           
  
 
 
                             
                            Edible composite coating based on corn starch and plasticized gelatin (with glycerol or sorbitol) was 
applied onto the red crimson grapes to extend its shelf -life. Coated grapes had improved appearance 
after storage for 21 days under refrigerated conditions, and  also had a lower weight loss 
compared with the control group.  The flow chart shows the formation of edible film using mung 
dal beans and pomegranate  peel. Different concentration (0, 2.5,  12.5 and 25%) of the 
pomegranate peel were produced  and made into fil ms. It was observed that the mechanical 
properties, reducing power, anti -radical activity, antibacterial attributes of mung bean protein films 
considerably improved by adding pomegranate peel.  
Comparison between edible coating and active packaging  
The comparison  between  the shelf  life of active packaging and edible coating on banana, guava 
and tomatoes are shown in the table provided. In case of banana, the active packaging increased 
the shelf life to 33 days at 30°C and 80% RH  compared to control with lasted for 5 to 6 days , 
while EC increased the shelf life to 56 days at at 25±2 °C  and 80 % RH  compared to  control 
 
                                 
                                   
                               
                                   
                   
  
     
 
                          
                                    
                                  
                            
                                
       
        
                
   
 
              
                    
           
 
       
                       
                  
                  
            
                  
                 
       
        
             
which lasted for 1 week without coating at 25±2 °C . In guava the active packaging extended 
the shelf life to 32 days  at 30 °C and 80 % RH  compared t o 4-5 days at 30 °C without 
packaging . Edible coating extended the shelf life to 40 days at 4-7 °C and 80 % RH  as 
compared to 7 days without coating at 4 -7 °C. For tomatoes the shelf life was extended to 65 
days at 10 °C and 85% RH  by active packaging while without pac kaging  the tomatoes only 
lasted for 15 days. Edible coating gave 49 days at 10 °C and 85%  RH compared to 15 days  at 
10 °C without co ating  
Problems associated  with edible coating and film  
Modification of internal atmosphere can increase disorders associated with high CO 2 or low 
O2. Waxing of apples and pears ripening and respiration rate inhibited, but alcoholic flavours                 
developed due to anaerobic fermentation.  Apple coated with SFAE had few detrimental 
changes in terms of fruit firmness, yellowing and weight loss but had increased incidence of 
core flush.  Tomatoes coated with 0.6 mm zein films produced alcoholic off flavours.  Color 
change, loss of firmness, ethanol fermentation, decay ratio and weight loss of  EC fruits and 
vegetables are important quality parameters.  Wax & SFAE are the most widely used coating 
materials.  Consumers dislike wax coatings which impart waxy taste.  Need for developing 
alternative coating materials that do not impart waxy taste.  Effect of EC on internal gas 
composition & their interaction with quality parameters must be determined.  
Self-healing  edible coating 
Edible coatings may become damaged during application, transportation, and storage.  Once 
the coating is damaged, there is increased risk of exchange between components in the fruit 
and the environment.  The damaged surface may become an area for  microbial growth, thereby 
negatively impacting food quality.  The coating was fabricated via layer -by-layer assembly of 
chitosan (CS) and sodium alginate (SA); (SA/CS) 3 formed by three assembly cycles.  The 
mechanical properties and the water and oxygen rates of the healed coating were                                      
                                                
 
                                                                                  
 
        
  
 
                        
 
                                                    
         
                                        
 
                                                                                          
                                                      
 
                           
    
                            
         
 
 
                                                                                    
                                                          
 
                                                      
 
                                                       
 
                                                                         
      
 
                                                                         
                              97%, 63%, and 95%, respectively . The process  of layer -by-layer  coating of SA, water, CS and 
water and the repetition  process is shown in th e figure. When the damage occurs, the gas and 
moisture t ransfer through the damaged area. Once th e healing proceeds, the surface heals to 
form a full layer agai n thus stopping the exchange of gas and moisture between the produce 
and the atmosphere.  
 
Summary  
Edible coatings and films offer a plausible solution to obtain fresh, nutritive products.  They 
serves as a semipermeable barrier to gases and water vapor, thereby reducing respiration     and 
water loss.  Biodegradable coating/film add another advantage to the smart  film technology as 
the coatings minimize the environmental load.  Most of the gum edible coatings are directly 
applied ont o fruit and vegetable surfaces by dipping or spraying followed by air -drying.  The 
application of edible coating conserves the overall quality and extends the  shelf  life of fruits 
and vegetables.  
 
                                                                                   
 
                                                                                                
                    
 
                                          
                                               
             
 
                                    
  
  
 
                                                         
       
 
                                
 
                                                                                   
                                
    
 
                      
                        
References  
 
  
 
 
Reference for further reading is provided in the slide.  
 
 
 
 
          
 
               
       
                                                                                                               
                                           
 
    
 
                           
          
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                       
 
   
                                                                                                                                          
                                                      
 
                                    
   
                
   
                                      
  
                                              
                                                                       
 
        
         
        
        
    
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                            
 
   
 
      
                                                                                                                              
       
 
   
 
                               
 
       
 
  
 
     
 
   
 
          
          
 
         
      
          
      
           
         
        
       
      
                                                              
                                                                                                  
 
     
 
                         
           
                       
    
 
      
                                                          
                                                                                     
 
                                                                           
 
           
  
                     
            
             
 
     
 
           
          
                                                                        
     
                                               
                             
   
          
 
    
 
                                            
        
                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 
    
 
     
 
                    
 
                                                    
  
                                                  
 
 
            
                                                                            
                              
         
 
     
         
 
                                                                                                                             
  
        
                      
 
   