1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Processing of Fruits, Vegetables, Spices and Plantation Crop 
Products  
Professor H. N. Mishra  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture 31  
Drying Techniques and Equipment  
 
The concepts covered in this lecture include drying of fruits & vegetables , and the methods and 
technologies for drying of the fruits and vegetables which may be beneficial from the quality point 
of view. So, the methods and equipment used here will includ e hot airflow drying, fluidized bed 
drying, microwave, radiofrequency, infrared drying, pulse vacuum drying, and refractance 
window , foam mat, and osmotic drying.  
 
2 
 Drying of fruits and vegetables  
The drying and dehydration mainly is to reduce the moisture  content  of the material to the desired 
level . As shown in figure, fruits and vegetable s are put into the dryer , where heat is supplied. In 
general, the heat supply sources may be conduction, convection, internal generation of heat 
through microwaves and radio frequency or even the surface radiation like sunlight or a 
combination of various methods.  The dried fruits and vegetables are the output of the dryer along 
with the removal of moisture.  
 
A general scheme for fruit and vegetable drying  
The raw fruit s and vegetable s after subjecting various  pretreatments like sorting,  washing , peeling , 
coring  etc. and then  can be subjected to two major  treatment s depending upon  their form s and 
nature of the dried product . Either the products are subjected to slicing o r cutting, or grinding, 
crushing, or extrusion. After the pretreatments, the products are dried by a suitable drying 
technique. After the drying process, the products are either in the form of dry particles or whole 
dried products. After the crushing/grind ing operation, the extracted juice and pulp are dried to 
produce dry powders or flakes. All these dehydrated products are properly packed prior to ware 
housing and shipping.  
3 
  
Hot air flow drying  
It is a traditional drying method in the vegetable/fruit dehydration industry, and the products are 
always called AD vegetables/fruits.  This drying is used to enhance the storage stability, to 
minimize packaging, requirement to reduce transportation cost . In this drying technique, 
temperature, air flow, and air humidity can be controlled.  
 
Heat and moisture transfer  
In the drying chamber, the heat is flowing inside and the moisture is removed from the dryer. T 1 
is the temperature of the product that is put into the dryer, and the temperature is raised to T 2 with 
the help of heated air. In the drying chamber, some insulation is provided so that there is no heat 
loss. So, water on the surface of the  material is dried by hot air flow . Moisture migration and heat 
4 
 transfer due  to temperature difference occur in the o pposite direction , as shown in the figure . Heat 
is flowing from outside to  inside and moisture is going from inside to outside because the material  
kept inside . So, when the moisture content in  the external part is lower than that in the internal 
part, water diffuse from high moisture region to low moisture region . At the same time , the 
temperature in the external part is higher than that in the internal part . Thus, it creates a temperature 
difference, which facilitate the moisture  removal . Control of he at and moisture transfer is essential 
to preserve the quality of the  dried vegetables and fruits . 
 
Mass & energy balance  
(a) Mass bala nce (Water entering and leaving ) 
Water in = Water out  
ṁaH2+ṁpX1= ṁaH1+ṁpX2 
Where, ṁa & ṁp are flow rate of air (kg dry air/h) and product (kg dry solids/h)  
H1 &  H2 are absolute humidity (kg water/kg dry air)  
X1 and X2 are initial and final product moisture content (kg water/kg dry solids)  
(b) Energy balance (Energy entering and leaving the dr yer) 
Energy in = Energy out  
ṁaha2+ṁphp1= ṁaha1+ṁphp2+ q 
Where,  ha1 & ha2  are energy content of entering and leaving air (kJ/kg dry air)  
5 
  hp1 & hp2  are energy content of entering and leaving product (kJ/kg dry solids)  
q is energy lost to surroundings (kJ/h)   
For adiabatic process, q = 0  
 
Enthalpies of air and product  
(a) Enthalpy of air  
The enthalpy of air in kJ/kg dry air is  
ha= Cs (Ta−T0)+H0 
Cs=1.005+1.88 H 
Where,  ha is enthalpy of air (kJ/kg dry air) , Cs is the humid heat of air (kJ/kg dry air °C) , Ta is the 
temperature of air (°C) , T0 is the datum/reference temperature of air (°C) , 0 is latent heat of water 
at T0 °C (kJ/kg water) , H is the absolute humidity (kg water/kg dry air) . 
(b) Enthalpy of wet solids  
The enthalpy of wet solids in kJ/kg dry so lid is  
hp= Cps (Tp−T0)+X Cpw (Tp−T0) 
Where,  hp is enthalpy of wet solid (kJ/kg dry solids) , Cps is the specific heat of solids (kJ/kg dry 
solid °C) , Tp is the product temperature of air (°C) , X is the water content (kg water/kg dry solid) , 
Cpw is the specific heat of water (kJ/kg water °C) . 
6 
  
The figure represents the schematic diagram of box type vegetable dryer. Another figure shows 
the multilayer AD vegetable dryer. The product is loaded into the drying chamber in different 
layers one above the other. There is a sufficient gap between the la yers so that the hot air, steam is 
passing.  Through this outlet channel, humid air goes out or in some cases, it is recirculated.  
So, air flows through , it goes above the , so heated air goes above and finally  humid air outlet , 
channel is provided . Through this outlet channel , humid air goes out or in some cases , it is 
recirculated . The recirculating  air dryer , that is the , that is  air it is coming out , it is again heated 
and used . 
In the mesh belt  air dried vegetable dry er, the material  is fed through this hopper , conveyed into 
this dryer with the help of conveyor belt and then it moves . And where it comes in contact with 
hot air , the moisture leaves out of the surface , and finally that the dryer product is delivered on t he 
other end of the  equipment . 
7 
  
Fluidised bed dryer  
The hot air flows through the materials quickly, and the fluidized bed is connected with a vibrating 
motor. With the action of mechanical vibration and hot airflow, the weight of the materials can be 
balanced in a fluidized state.  The advantages of this drying technology are a irflow with high 
temperature and low moisture content achieve high dr ying rate and energy efficiency, r equires low 
capital investment, is easy to maintain, e asy to control, and un iform drying.  It is used for drying 
of the granular vegetables, such as potato dices, apple dices, carrot dices, etc.  
 
Factors affecting AD  
Pre-treatments  
8 
 Physical (Blanching)  
Blanching is used to inactivate the enzymes by denaturing the protein.  If the e nzymes are not 
inactivated , it may cause the browning and other problems during the drying process with the 
activation of the heat.  Cell membrane permeability changes which indirectly affects the resistance 
of cell membrane for evaporation. Hot steam trea tment avoids enzymatic browning . Chemical 
treatments include a ddition of chemical reagents, the vegetables color and rehydration ability can 
be maintained.  Sulfur treatment involves pretreating with sulfite solution or sulfur dioxide, 
enzymatic browning and  non-enzymatic browning can be inhibited.  Metal ion treatment includes 
the a ddition of metal ions, metal complexes forms in the  cell which protects the color,  e.g. Cupric 
and zinc ion used for protecting green color.  Salt and alkali treatment  reduces the dissolved oxygen 
and inhibits enzymatic browning and i mprove s the structure of rehydrated vegetable products.  
 
Higher air temperature, increases moi sture holding capacity of air. High temperature difference 
between product and air increase rate  of dehydration.  Faster air velocity, more rapid moisture 
removal and vice versa.  Low air humidity, air can absorb more moisture and vice versa.  At constant 
temperature, if pressure lowers, the boiling temperature decreases which increase rate of moisture 
removal.   
9 
  
Dielectric drying  
This drying uses dielectric energy for removal of water . The dielectric energy absorption takes 
place by means of dipolar relaxation (where w ater molecules attempt to follow the electric field as 
they rotate at very h igh frequencies, s uch rotations of the water molecules produce heat, which is 
expressed as the dipolar relaxation) and ionic conduction (i ons, such as those present in salty food, 
migrate under the influence of the electric  field, thereby generating heat). Ther e two types of the 
dielectric drying are microwave drying and radiofrequency drying. And both these methods are 
becoming very popular nowadays for the dehydration of fruits and vegetables.  Both the dielectric 
constant and the  dielectric loss factor can mea sure the  ability of the material to interact with   the 
electric field of MW/RFs.  
 
Microwave drying  
10 
 Microwave drying uses high frequency electromagnetic waves (300 -3000 MHz). Microwave 
heating is caused by the ability of the materials to absorb microwave energy and convert it into 
heat.  This involves the d ipolar and ionic mechanisms that c ause vol umetric heating of the material. 
The advantages of this drying techniques are faster drying rate, i mprove quality of s ome foods by 
reducing shrinkage, and c ombini ng with other methods improve efficiency.  Excessive temperature 
can cause scorching and production of o ff flavors. Rapid mass transfer can cause puffing, might 
be undesirable in some products.  
 
The figure shows the schematic diagram of a continuous microw ave dryer.  The fruits and 
vegetables in the form of slices, cubes  are fed in the feed bins. W ith the help of the conveyor belt 
they are put into the  microwave dryer. The products are exposed to the microwave radiation and 
absorb the microwave, internal hea t is generated.  Some suitable arrangement in the system is given 
to take out the moisture, water vapor from the system. And then finally, the dried material is comes, 
a proper sui table after locking arrangement.  
11 
  
Microwave assisted air/vacuum drying  
Hot a ir drying is combined with microwave heating in order to enhance the drying rate. Microwave 
heating can be combined with hot air in three different stages of the drying process.  In the stage I, 
microwave heating is applied at the beginning in which the int erior gets heated rapidly.  In the 
second stage, microwave heating creates a porous structure which can further facilitate the mass 
transfer of water vapor.  At the final stage of drying, the drying rate begins to fall, microwave 
heating vaporize moisture an d force it outside.  It accelerates moisture transport from t he inside of 
product to outside, reduces the drying time, improve rehydration properties, and i mprove retention  
of color.  
 
These are the schematic  diagram of microwave assisted fluidized bed dryer and microwave 
assisted tunnel dryer.  
12 
  
Radiofrequency drying  
Like MW, RF waves are part of the electromagnetic spectrum, the difference is the frequency 
range. RF treatment involves heating with electroma gnetic waves (10 to 300 MHz) and at 
frequencies such as 13.56 MHz, 27.12 MHz and 40.68 MHz. RF drying is a volumetric heating 
method where electromagnetic waves directly couple with food to generate heat.  Non uniform 
heating and runaway heating, which caus e overheating in corners, edges, and center parts, 
especially in foods of intermediate and high water content.  
 
RF assisted air dryer  
In a radio frequency  assisted air dryer , there are two electrodes  one at the  bottom and  another at 
the upper side, the ma terial is kept between these electrodes . With the help of conveyor belt , the 
13 
 material is moving  and there is a provision for supply of hot air . At the same time when it comes , 
then radio frequency waves are provided . And hot air is distributed in the chamber , and this is 
facilitated by radio frequency drying . So the drying rate is enhanced .  
 
Infrared drying  
Portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, which falls between the region o f visible light and 
microwaves. When electromagnetic radiation impinges o n food surface, it causes changes in the 
electronic, rotational, and vibrational states of atoms and molecules.  After penetration in food 
materials, IR rays vibrate the constituent molecules at a frequency of 60,000 –150,000 MHz, which 
results in intermolec ular friction and brings about rapid internal heating.  This is because the O –H 
bonds in water absorb the IR radiation energy and rotate with the same frequency as the IR 
radiation.  
 
14 
 These are the different arrangement s of IR drying such as simple IR dryin g, IR assisted hot air 
drying, IR assisted vacuum drying, and IR assisted freeze drying. In infrared assisted hot air drying , 
infrared lamp chamber is there where some additional supply of hot air is provided. Infrared  
assisted vacuum drying  that is along with this supply , there is also chamber is provided  with a 
vacuum pump to reduce  heat that, which can  facilitate the vaporization at a lower temperature . 
And then infrared assisted freeze drying , the freeze drying principles  are employed . The low er 
temperature condensers  that are provided to reduce the temperature to -23 or -50 ᵒC. 
 
Pulsed vacuum drying  
Pulsed vacuum drying (PVD) is a novel drying technology which uses successive change of 
vacuum pressure in the drying chamber to enhance moisture  transfer during drying process.  During 
the PVD operation, the pressure of drying chamber is successively changed between atmospheric 
pressure and vacuum until the safety moisture is obtained.  Additionally, pressure pulsation results 
in a tunneling effect  to enlarge and interconnect the micropores in the products which is a benefit 
for moisture transfer.  PVD processing, creates an oxygen deficient environment, which can reduce 
adverse biochemical reactions, such as oxidation deterioration, browning reactio ns and thereby 
improve the quality of dried products. PVD has been employed in the drying of wolfberry and 
seedless grape.  The PVD  equipment mainly consists of a heating and cooling system , vacuum 
generation  system , vacuum  creation system , and the control system .  
15 
  
Pulsed vacuum dryer  
It consists of drying chamber , touch screen , electric heating panel temperature sensor , material 
internal temperature sensor , pressure sensor , vacuum valve , air tight condenser , vacuum pump , air 
solenoid valve , drain solenoid  valve , electric heating panel . This  is a schematic diagram of vacuum 
duration and atmospheric pressure . So, this successively , that material inside is brought to the  low 
pressure , that is vacuum created and then it is released , then vacuum created,  then it  is released in 
order to provide a  better frying  efficiency . 
 
Refractance window (RW) drying  
The RW drying system consists of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film for transmitting the 
radiant energy to the product for drying and to convey from on e side to another side.  The system 
16 
 consists of PET film  (To transfer heat from hot water to product ), pulleys ( To support film and 
convey product ), hot water bath ( To heat the product ), cold water bath ( To cool the leaving 
product ), water tank and heating unit ( To store and heat water ), pump  (To recirculate water in the 
system ), stainless steel hood ( To exhaust the vapour that  is evaporated from the product).  
 
RW drying process parameters  
Water temperature  
Water is a heating medium with temperature normally less than 100 °C. The drying rate of the 
product mainly depends upon the water bath temperature. The increase in water temperature by 10 
°C results in an increased evaporation rate by 16% . 
Product thickne ss 
The time required to move the moisture f rom the center to the product surface increases with an 
increase in the thickness of the product, resulting in a lower drying rate thereby the drying time 
increases. The lower thickness of the product offers bette r color, flavor, nutrients, and functional 
components’ retention than the high thick samples.  
Initial product temperature  
High initial temperature of the produ ct offers less drying time, less energy requirements, and a 
high evaporation rate.  
Residence time  
Prolonging exposure of products to high temperatures results in poor product quality. The selection 
of optimum drying time is of utmost importance in order to achieve better quality products.  
17 
 Film thickness  
The thickness and type of film being used influe nces the amount of energy radiated and conducted. 
The choice of optimum film thickness is essential for high heat transfer and maximum mechanical 
strength.  
Energy efficiency  
RW drying systems typically have a thermal efficiency of 52 -77% which is equivalen t to drum 
drying. Hot air drying systems, however, deliver only 50% of RW dryer performance.  
 
 
Foam -mat drying  
18 
 Foam -mat drying is a process where liquid foods are whipped into stable foams and then air dried. 
During the heated air drying, it is required that the foams remain stable and retain typical open 
structure to simplify rapid drying and detraying. Heat sensitive fruit juices and vegetable purees, 
that may be hard to dry and sticky, have been successfully dried by foam mat drying.  
 
Foam -mat drying process  
The first step is the preparation of food, which includes peeling, juicing, coring, and pulping. The 
second step is foam formation, where stabilizing and foaming agents are added and whipping 
action takes place. Foam formation is done by whipping o r beating an aqueous solution in presence 
of gas.  Foam stabilizers are the additives that enable a foam to retain its structure for                         
longer d uration and delay coalescence, e.g. Methyl cellulose, maltodextrin. Foaming agents reduce 
the surface tension between the interfaces an d help in foaming of the liquid,  e.g.  Gelatin, egg 
white, glycerol monostearate.  The third step is drying by microwave, hot air, or freeze drying.  So, 
because of the higher surface area, the drying rate is enhan ced. The dried products in the form of 
flakes  are subjected to size reduction, sieving, and finally packed.  
19 
  
Osmotic drying  
Osmotic dehydration is the phenomenon of removal of water from lower concentration of solute 
to higher concentration through semi p ermeable membrane; results in the equilibrium condition in 
both sides of membrane.  Osmotic dehydration is preferred over other methods due to their colour, 
aroma, nutritional constituents and flavor compound retention value.  Osmotic dehydration 
depends on  the temperature of the osmotic solution, concentration of the osmotic solution, osmotic 
agents, process duration, and geometry of the food material, whether it in form of a thin seed, in 
the form of a cube, thick tube, fingers etc. 
 
Osmotic a gents : Uses a nd advantages   
20 
 Sodium chloride is used for in vegetables to reduce the high a w depression capacity. Sucrose and 
lactose are mainly used for the fruits , particularly it reduces browning and increases retention of 
volatiles , and partial substitution of sucrose. Glycerol can be used for both fruits and vegetables, 
it improves texture.  Combination of the osmotic agents can be used  for fruits and vegetables.  
 
Osmotic dehydration system  
There is a storage tank which is used for the preparation of the  osmoti c solution and then with the 
help of suitable pumps and rotometer , osmotic  solution is supplied into the  product processing 
tank. And in this processing  tank, the pump rota meter is used to control the flow rate and 
processing tank for holding the product  and osmotic  solution . And finally , there is a n evaporator 
chamber to concentrate the osmotic solution .  
 
21 
 In summary, MW, IR and hot airflow drying technique is mostly used for the vegetable and fruit 
drying process individually or in c ombination with other methods. EHD drying is a non -thermal 
process in whic h corona (ionic) wind dries the product.  The RW drying, foam amt drying and 
osmotic drying are the important processes based  on the type and requirement of the dried product. 
RF dryi ng are the emerging techniques in which the heat generation inside the                                                    
product is due to intermolecular frictions. In PVD, the pressure of the drying chamber chang es 
alternately which enlarges the pores of  the product facilitating more moisture migration.  
 
 
These are the references for further study. Thank you.  
