1 
 
Post Harvest operations and Processing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H. N. Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 20  
Packaging Methods and Equipment 
 
This lecture covers topics on packaging methods and equipment s uch as packaging materials, 
methods and equipment used for fresh produce 
Packaging Materials 
 2 
 
Different types of materials that are used for packaging of fre sh produce includes wood in the 
form of pallets or crates; plast ic in the form of containers, f ilms, multi-layered, co-extruded, 
and flexible films; paper in the  form of bags and corrugated bo xes.  
Wood Crates 
A wood crates consists of rigid corners with planks nailed or s tretched against those corners. 
Plank thickness varies normally between 3 and 8 mm. Cutting the  wood will result in loss due 
to the saw thickness around 2 to 3 mm. A slicing machine can be  used for thin planks up to 6 
mm but these machines are expensive. Thus, in general hand saw is used for cutting wood to 
manufacture crates or planks. Different constructions are possi ble for wooden crates. Which 
includes nail crates, stitch crat es and write-bound crates. The  wooden planks and crates are 
normally used for secondary packag ing of the material for shipm ent or for transportation.  
Plastic Containers 
Thermoforming is a process for converting an extruded plastic s heet into small items such as 
thin wall packaging containers, cups, plates and trays. The two  types of thermoforming 
techniques are mechanical and pressure thermoforming. In mechan ical thermoforming 
preheated plastic sheets, which are marked by red color in the given figure, are formed into a 
mold in the desired shape of the container by external mechanic al force. In pressure 
thermoforming, air pressure is applied instead of the mechanica l force to form the desired 
shape.  
 3 
 
Steps of Pressure Thermoforming 
The steps of pressure thermofor ming are a roll or  thin plastic sheeting followed by pulling the 
material into the machine by vacuum pressure. The sheet is heat ed few degrees above its Tg 
or Tm and then it is stretched a gainst a rigid mold by applying  the air pressure. In final step, 
the formed part is cooled and trimmed from the non-part. The pr essure thermoformed 
containers are shown in the picture.  
Multi Layered Films – Bl own Film Extrusion 
Multi layered films like blown film extrusion is one of the imp ortant techniques for making 
the plastic films. Blown film ext rusion is extensively utilized  to fabricate multilayered 
packaging films to improve mechanical, transport, and thermal p roperties.  4 
 
It uses compressed air and a set up nip rolls to stretch the fi lms. It utilizes the least amount of 
floor space but it needs a lot of height. High output blown fil ms towers are even several 
stories high. The picture of a bl own film tower that goes on to  multi story building is shown 
in the figure.  
Steps of Blown Film Extrusion 
The steps of the blown film extrusion process are shown in the picture where the first step is 
the polymer extrudate exiting from the extruder head into a die . The resin pellets are fed into 
the extruder via the hopper and the polymer enters the die. The  die converts the solid flow of 
molten polymer to a hollow tube and enters the nip roller where  it is converted to film rolls. 
The outlet of the tubular die is at 90 degrees to the direction  of the extruder as shown in the 
figure provided. Thus, the steps involved are, the polymer extr udate exits from the extruder 5 
 
head into the die. The die converts a solid flow of molten poly mer to a hollow tube of molten 
polymer. The outlet of the tubular die is at 90° to the directi on of the extruder. The molten 
polymer flows around the mandrel and emerges through a round op ening (also called a ring) 
to form a tube referred to as the bubble, up in a vertical dire ction. Air is then blown in 
through the die head into the ring, thereby inflating the tube into a thin tubular bubble. This 
tube is then flattened at the  nip rolls and then taken to the w inder. 
 6 
 
 
 7 
 
 8 
 
The molten polymer flows around the mandrel and emerge through a round openings also 
called a ring to form a tube ref erred to as the bubble, up in t he vertical direction. Air is blown 
in through the die head into the ring thereby inflating the tub e into a thin tubular bubble. This 
tube is then flattened at the nip roll and taken to the winder.  The video provided shows the 
blown film extrusion process.  
Co-extruded Cast Films 
Coextruded multilayer film is produced by a compound molding te chnique that 
simultaneously extrudes thermoplastic resin with multiple extru ders and passes that through a 
single die to build up layers of melted resin both on the insid e and outside of a film. The 
figure shows different layers of the coextruded cast films such  as the three layers of raw 
materials with printing surface on one side and sealing surface  on another side. The different 
layers of raw materials are passed to three separate setup extr uders and the multi manifold is 
passed through T-die and passed ov er a cooling roll to form fil m .  S o ,  t h e  e x t r e m e l y  t h i n  
layers of resin that cannot be ma de into a film they are layere d by co-extrusion. And this 
composite film has properties such as heat resistance, heat sel ling capabilities, rigidity, 
flexibility, cold resistance, or easy-peel capability etc. Such  f i l m s  a r e  u s e d  i n  a s e p t i c  
processing and packaging of dair y products, fruits, juices, and  vegetable juices. 
Flexible Films 
Flexible polymer films are produced by cast extrusion and blown  film extrusion. A multi-
layer film can be obtained by th e co-extrusion of different pol ymeric materials by adhesive 
lamination of several plastic f ilms or by extrusion lamination.  9 
 
A tender frame can be used to orient biaxially cast films. Impr ovement of the barrier 
properties of plastic films is possible by lacquering the surfa ce or depositing a very thin layer 
of aluminum (metallization) or of silicon or aluminum oxide. La cquering a thin layer of 
aluminum or of silicon or aluminum oxide improves the printabil ity of the films. The films 
could also have a paper layer for added advantage. Typical adhe sives used in laminating 
processes are waterborne, solvent based, hot melt or reactive 1 00 % solids that are solvent 
less.  
Examples of Flexible Packaging 10 
 
Few examples of flexible packaging such as laminated rolls, sta nd up pouch, centre seal 
pouch, side seal pouch and gusset pouch are shown in the slide.  Fresh fruits and vegetables 
can be packed in the laminate d film pouches as shown in the fig ure. 
Vegetables Packaging Machine 
 
  11 
 
 12 
 
 
The video shows vegetables being washed and packaged in plastic  f i l m s .  I t  m e a s u r e s  t h e  
length of the vegetables to be packed and decides the dimension  of the film required for 
packaging automatically. 
Vegetables in Flexible Packages 
 
 13 
 
 14 
 
 
The video shows packaging of vegetable in flexible package. The  b r o c c o l i  i s  c l e a n e d  a n d  
wrapped in plastic pouches, whi ch is compressed and sealed in a  vacuum chamber.  
Overwrap Packaging with or without Tray 
The video shows packaging of veg etables with tray. The vegetabl es are placed on a tray and 
wrapped with a plastic film a nd passed through the vacuum chamb er. 
 15 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
 18 
 
 
The other video shows individual vegetable like carrot, egg pla nts and cucumbers being 
packed without a tray.  
Paper 
Paper is another one of the most commonly used packaging materi al. The raw material of the 
paper severely affects the quality due to its variation in fibe r length and pulp composition. 
Paper can be manufactured from cottonseed, hair, flax leaves, s unflower stalk and even 
agricultural waste. 
 19 
 
Wood cell wall consists of cellulo se, hemi-cellulose and lignin , which provide certain 
property that are useful in converting them to paper. Cellulose  has fibre forming properties, 
while hemicellulose is responsible for the hydration of pulp an d the development of bonding 
during beating processes. Ligni n is a natural binding constitue nt of wood cells with no fiber 
forming ability.  
Steps of Paper Preparation Process 
Different steps in the paper pr eparation process are pulping, b leaching, beating and refining 
followed by stock preparation, pape r making and final treatment s. Pulping is the process of 
separating wood fibers using mechan ical, chemical or thermal tr eatments or in combination. 
Lignin is dissolved to produce i ndividual fibers during pulping  which can be reformed to 
paper sheet during paper making pr ocess. The solution or the fi bers obtained after the pulping 
treatment is known as the pulp.  20 
 
Next step is the bleaching pro cess in which bleaching treatment  is applied to improve the 
whiteness of the chemical and mech anical pulp. Chromatography g roups of lignin are 
responsible for color of the pul p which are removed during blea ching by using chlorine, 
chlorine dioxide or hydrogen peroxide.  
The bleached pulp is then subjected to a process called beating  and refining. Beating 
treatment increases the surface area of the fibers, thus increa sing their water holding capacity 
and creating additional bonding opportunities for fibers. Refin ing process is similar to beating 
process, it improves the physical properties of the finished sh eet. The stock preparation stage 
involves the mechanical treat ment of pulp for its conversion in to a sheet on paper machine.  21 
 
 
Final process is the paper making which process involves mainly  three different methods, 
fourdrinier machine, cylinder m achine and twin wire formers. Th e fibrous material with 
approximately 99% water is passed through the rollers or wire m esh to remove water and 
form the paper web.  
Then final treatment is given that includes calendaring, superc alendaring, sizing, laminating, 
impregnating or saturating the developed paper as per the requi rement of the industry or the 
product to be packaged. 
 
 22 
 
Based on the grade that papers are classified as virgin paper o r virgin grade paper or recycled 
paper. Based on the smoothness and treatment, it can be classif ied as bleached pulp, which is 
considered as a fine paper or  unbleached pulp that is coarse pa per.  
Paper Bags 
Different types of paper like grease resistant, kraft paper, re cycled kraft, coated papers, wax 
impregnated, laminated papers are used for manufacturing of pap er bags. They are available 
in different forms such as flat and satchel, self-opening satch e l  ( S O S )  b a g s ,  s t r i p  w i n d o w  
bags, et cetra. Research studies had been conducted for the use  of lignocellulosic micro or 
nano fibers from the sawdust with recycled cardboard. The pros include they are 
biodegradable, reusable, recyclable. Many paper bags can withst and more pressure or weight 
23 
 
than plastic bags. Less suffocation risk to young children or a nimals. The disadvantage are 
that they are not waterproof, more expensive than plastic bags,  requires more storage space 
and are relatively heavier than the plastic. The table provided  shows basic information on 
paper bag types and their capaci ties. Different types of paper bags available in the market are 
lunch bags, grocery bags, beer liquor and wine bags, baguette b read bags, produce bags, 
recloseable tin tie coffee bags or merchandize bags. The capaci ty of the bags varies from half 
to 8 pounds. Their length, width and  height information are als o provided in the table given. 
Corrugated Fiberboard (CFD) 
The raw material for CFB is mainly Kraft paper. However, agave bagasse, by-products from 
the tequila industry had also been used. It consists of two or more layers of flat kraft paper 
that is liner and layers of corrugated material called flute, s andwiched between the flat layers 
to provide cushioning effect and abrasion resistance. The flute d materials is developed using 
corrugator which involves passage of flat kraft paper between t wo serrated rollers, followed 
by application of adhesive to th e tips of the corrugations and liner is stuck to the corrugated 
material using pressure. The figur e shows the fiber board used for packing of fruits. 
Making of Corrugated Fiber Board 24 
 
The making process of corrugated fiber board is shown in the vi deo. The paper material is  
passed between two rollers, fo llowed by pressure roll, glue rol l and finally the metering roll.  
Bio-based Packaging 
Bio based packaging is becoming more due to its main advantage of circular economy and 
reusability. Bio based packaging can be made bio degradable thu s reducing the havoc caused 
by environmental pollution. In this type of packaging, biopolym ers like cellulose, PEF, lipids 
and waxes, proteins, PLA, PBS, starch, and PHA are used. The bi opolymers are subjected to 
further modification processed to improve its barrier propertie s like water barrier property, 
and oxygen barrier properties. Thr ough extrusion technology the y are converted to laminates. 
They are used for various packag ing applications such as blown bags, non-blown bags, food 
wraps, woven fabric tea bags, nets for fruits and vegetable, mu ltilayer trays for dairy 25 
 
products, monolayer trays and films for fruits and vegetables. These packaging are 
biodegradable and recyclable. Tw o types of extrusion processing  are used for biobased 
packaging materials such as single-screw extrusion which is app lied for general polymer 
processing, that is blow molding, cast film extrusion and injec tion molding. The other type is 
twin screw extrusion process which is used for compounding and polymer blending. Thus, 
either single screw extrusion or  twin screws extrusion could be  used depending upon the 
properties that are desi red in the material. 
The slide shows fruits and vegetables packed in bio-based plast ic packaging materials that 
has been developed. The figure shows fruits packed in biodegrad able material made from 
hybrid carrageenan that is extracted from Mastocarpus stellatus  seaweeds and rice starch. 
These are thin, flexible and transparent films with enhanced UV  barrier properties, oxygen 
barrier properties and hydrophobic properties. The packaging ma terial is promising for all the 
applications requiring a moderate gas exchange through the pack aging material. The barrier 
properties of the packaging mate rials are tailored according to  the type of the produce. It 
should allow moderate level of oxygen to come in and let out ca rbon dioxide to maintain the 
aerobic respiration. The packagi ng should also provide sufficie nt strength. 
YPACK packaging is made from is made from a sustainable biopoly mer, poly                        
(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvale rate) (PHBV), created using cheese whey and   micro-
cellulose from almond shells. It  showed a short-term (15 days) and medium-term (up to 48 
days) anti-bacterial effects in  ‘open’ and ‘closed’ systems. 26 
 
Now, the trend towards packaging of fresh produce is coming tow ards bio-based packaging 
material. They can be reused and are biodegradable, thus addres sing the environmental 
problems. 
The summary of the lecture are wooden crates are used for trans portation of food products to 
longer distances. Plastics in the form of trays, containers are  produced by blown film 
extrusion or cast film extrusi on. The films can be co-extruded to incorporate multiple film 
attributes. Although, paper do not provide enough mechanical st rength, due to its                        
reusability and biodegradability, paper bags are gaining popula rity. Bio-based packaging 
materials are now in trend due to its sustainability, multiple film properties and good storage 
life. 
The reference for further read ing are provided in the slides. 27 
 
 
 
 
 