1 
 
Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
Lecture 21 
Minimal Processing 
In this lecture various strategies for minimal processing and i ts application in fruits and 
vegetables are discussed.  
 
The topic covered in this lecture are Concept and need of minim al processing, key 
requirements in the minimal processing of fruits and vegetables , operational steps in minimal 
processing, quality changes in minimally processed fruits and v egetables, and safety issues 
with minimally processed foods.  
Minimal Processing 2 
 
Minimal processing may be define d as providing least possible t reatment to achieve a defined 
purpose. Other definitions are, fresh produce subjected to diff erent mild processing steps to 
obtain a fully edible and natu ral product while providing conve nience and functionality to 
consumer and ensuring food safety. Minimally influence the qual ity characteristics of a food 
while at the same time giving the food sufficient self-life dur ing its storage and distribution. 
Minimal processing should render the material as close as possi ble to its natural counterpart. 
The treatment given to the food material should be of minimum e xtent to get the desired 
value and shelf-life extension. 
Minimally Processed Foods 
Minimally processed food undergoes a mild preservation process.  The product temperature 
during processing falls between 0°C and 100°C. They rely on ref rigerated storage and 
distribution. They have water a ctivity higher than 0.85 and pH higher than 4.5. Examples of 
minimally processed foods may include fresh cut fruits and vege tables, prepared sandwich, 
ready to eat meals and chilled prepared foods. 
Advantages of Minimal Processing 
Minimal processing uses the optim ized design for preserving foo ds in its natural form in 
aspect of its nutri tion, safety and sensory characteristics.  3 
 
The figure shows the comparison of unprocessed, minimally proce ssed food and ultra 
processed foods. Unprocessed food is in its natural form, rich in micronutrients, fiber and 
other nutritional value. Minimally processed are subjected to s ome treatment, processing and 
packaging that they retain the benefits of its natural form whi le extending the shelf life. The 
ultra-processed foods are low in fiber, nutrients and has added  synthetic additives depending 
on the processing technology a nd methods of processing. 
Minimal processing techniques have emerged to replace tradition al methods of preservation 
whilst retaining nutritional and sensory quality. Minimally pro cessed food has similar 
characteristics to the whole original fruit or vegetables and c ould be used readily without 
further processing before use. It provides the advantage of con venience to the consumers. 
 4 
 
Minimal Processing Technologies 
Major categories of the minimal processing strategies may inclu de optimization of the 
traditional preservation methods. The traditional processing me thods are optimized in such a 
way to get minimum possible conditions such as low heat, pressu re, low salt concentration, et 
cetera to improve organoleptic pro perties and to maintain nutri tion value with the concern of 
microbiological safety. 
It uses mild to no heat treatment such as novel preservation te chniques like infrared heating, 
microwave heating, high pressure processing, ultrasonication, p ulsed and electric field 
processing. These are the novel advanced thermal technologies o r non-thermal technologies 
which can be used to reduce the severity of the processes and g et better nutriti onal properties. 5 
 
It uses synergistic effect that is the combination of various m ethods and techniques. The 
figure shows the concept of hurdle technology in which various preservation techniques like 
temperature, water activity, pH , oxidation reduction potentials , various chemicals and 
pressure are used in combination to reduce the severity of the process to extend the shelf life 
while having better nutritional value. 
Minimal processing technologies may be thermal technologies lik e optimized traditional 
methods or novel thermal methods. Optimized traditional thermal  methods includes high 
temperature short time methods, aseptic processing, semi asepti c processing, or sous-vide. 
Novel thermal technologies incl ude infrared heating, ohmic heat ing, microwave heating, and 
radiofrequency heating. Non-ther mal technologies are ionizing r adiation, high pressure 
processing, pulsed white light, ultraviolet light, laser light,  pulsed electric field, ultra sound, 
plasma sterilization, ozone treatment, etc. Packaging involves modified atmosphere 6 
 
packaging, control atmosphere packaging/Storage, vacuum packagi ng, gas flushing, edible 
film, edible coating, etc. Use of natural preservative like ant imicrobial proteins, plant derived 
antimicrobial agents and natural antioxidants can also be categ orized as minimal processing. 
Hurdle technology is combinati on of different pr eservation tech nologies. 
Minimal Thermal Processing: Traditional Methods 
Thermal processing leads to undesirable changes such as loss of  vitamins and minerals, 
texture, flavor and formation of thermal reaction components of  biopolymers. Inactivation of 
microorganisms depends on the temperature of the heat treatment , whereas undesirable 
quality changes depend on the tim e duration of the heat treatme nt.  In HTST, high 
temperatures gives rapid inactivation of microorganisms and enz ymes, and short duration 
reduces undesired quality changes. Other methods may include as eptic, semi-aseptic 
processing & UHT. Sous-vide proc essing is actual cooking of raw  foods under vacuum in the 
package. 
At high temperature and short time heating, the rate of the bac terial inactivation is very fast, 
but the nutrient destruction is comparatively low due to differ ence in the Z value of microbes 
and nutrients.  The Z value of the microorganism is less compar ed to Z value of the vitamins 
price. This property is taken int o advantage in the HTST proces ses, aseptic methods and 
ultra-high temperature processing.   
  7 
 
Minimal Thermal Processing:  Novel Methods 
Electromagnetic  Heating  
Electromagnetic waves deliver heat to food selectively and effe ctively like microwaves and 
radiofrequency waves. Microwaves (915 MHz and 2450 MHz) and RF (13.56 MHz; 27.12 
MHZ; and 40.68 MHz) interact wit h water in food to heat by indu ction and dielectric heating, 
which is also known as volumetric/ internal heating. This type of heating is more efficient, 
takes lesser duration a nd causes lesser change in the food comp ared to conventional methods. 
The figure shows the schematic diagram of a microwave and RF he ater. The microwaves are 
generated by the magnetron and distributed to the oven cavity v ia the wave guide. The 
microwave reaches the food kept in the oven cavity and causes d ielectric heating. In case of 
the RF heater, the food is placed be tween two electrodes, where  RF is generated. 8 
 
Ohmic Heating 
In ohmic heating, alternating el ectric current is passed throug h food where heat is generated 
to electrical resistance. Provi des quick and consonant heating,  resulting in less thermal 
damage and thus providing be tter nutritive value. 
The figure provided shows the sch ematic diagram of ohmic heatin g set up. It c onsists of two 
electrodes that provid es the alternating ele ctric current. The food product is placed or passed 
through the gap between t he two electrodes. 
Irradiation 
In irradiation technology, food is exposed to ionizing radiatio n to improve microbiological 
safety and extend shelf life. Mode of action of this technology  is direct ionization of fresh 
produce and formation of free radicals by gamma ray or electron  beams, which kills the 9 
 
pathogenic microbes without aff ecting the produce quality. The figure shows the source rack, 
storage pool, irradiation room, radiation and loading, unloadin g stations of an irradiation 
plant. 
High Pressure Processing 
One of the emerging non thermal techniques that has wide applic ation as minimal processing 
is high pressure processing. In this, the fresh produce or food  is applied with high hydrostatic 
pressure of about 400 to 600 mega Pascal. Application of high p ressure for short period 
inactivates microbes & enzymes. 
The figure shows the HPP process. The food material is packed a irtight or hermetically 
sealed and loaded into HPP carrier baskets. The baskets are ins erted into the HPP vessel. The 
vessel enters the system and is s ealed by plugs. Potable water is pumped into the vessel 
creating isocratic pressure (equal pressure on all sides) on th e packages. Product is held at the 
pressure of 45,000 to 87,000 psi (310 to 600 Mpa) for 1 to 6 mi nutes depending on the HPP 
process recipe. Pressure is tran smitted uniformly and instantan eously throughout the product 
to disrupt microbial biochemistr y of bacteria and spoilage micr oorganisms. 
Pulsed Electric Field 
Pulsed electric field processing  applies short pulses of electr icity for microbial inactivation. It 
generates electrical fields (5 – 50 kV/cm) with the help of sho rt high voltage pulses (µs) 
between two electrodes. Product placed between the electrode ex periences a force per unit 
charge which ruptures the bacterial cell membranes. Treatment o f fruits with PEF has also 
shown to improve the juice extractability, thus allowing ruptur e of fruit cell walls with 10 
 
minimal pressure. This prevents nutritional losses and bio-acti ves losses as extraction 
happens at minimum pressure as opposed to regular pressure, whi ch generates heat. The 
figure shows the process of por e initiation on the bacterial ce ll wall by electrical field. This 
causes inflex of water into the cells, followed by swelling, ru pture and inactiv ation of cells.  
Ultrasonication 
Ultrasonication involves mechanical waves having frequency more  than 20 kilohertz. This 
causes acoustic cavitation in food and results in heat, shear f orce and free radical formation. 
This also used to improve the jui ce extractability of fruits. T he figure shows the ultrasonic 
generator which consists of an u ltrasonic transducer and ultras ound probe. The ultrasound 
probe generates and transfers the ultrasound into the food mate rials. The sample enters from 
the bottom of the chamber and exists at the top of the chamber.  The chamber is double 
jacketed to circulate water f or temperature regulation. 
 
Pulsed Light Processing 
In pulsed light processing, decontamination of food is achieved  by applying highly 
concentrated energy as broad s pectrum bursts. About 1 to 20 fla shes per sec are applied to the 
food material. It has photochemical & photothermal effect of th e microbes and enzymes. The 
pulsed light processing setup consists of a treatment chamber e quipped with xenon flash 
lamp, through which the product is  passed through for the treat ment. 
 11 
 
Ozonation 
Ozone is a powerful oxidant and shown to be effective against v arious microbes. When 
applied on food material it auto decomposes to O 2 molecules leaving no residues. Ozonation 
is considered as greener food add itive that has been permitted by FDA. The setup consists of 
an ozone generator that genera tes ozone. It is passed through a n analyzer and then to a 
diffusion chamber where the food material is placed. Ozone pass es through the product 
disinfecting it and moves out  to ozone destructor.  
Packaging 
Other than processing, different packaging intervention is also  accepted as type of minimal 
processing strategies, especially for the whole produces. Widel y accepted packaging 
techniques are vacuum packaging, gas flushing packaging like ni trogen packaging, argon 
packaging or carbon monoxide and  carbon dioxide packaging. Othe r method is controlled 
atmosphere packaging where the packaging environments atmospher e composition is 
controlled and maintained to a pa rticular ratio. Other type is composite coating of the 
produce. The coatings used may be protein-based films, edible f ilms, lignin based coating 
films or polysaccharide based coating films. 
Modified Atmospheric Packaging 
MAP relies on the changing the surrounding gas composition by i nterplay between the film 
permeability to gases (O 2 and CO 2) and respiration rate of the  product inside the package  12 
 
 
As shown in the figure provided, MAP of fresh produce allows th e produce to breath by 
permitting O 2 and CO 2 transmission. It also allows transmission of water vapor outsi de to 
prevent condensation and allows t ranspiration. It controls ripe ning by lowering O 2 and 
elevating CO 2 concentration inside film. Semi permeable film allows transpor t of O 2, CO 2 
and water vapor. 
Edible Coating 
 
Edible coating includes coating of the produce with polysacchar ide, protein, lipid, composite, 
plasticizers with a surfactant to improve the adherence. The co ating material can carry 
antioxidant, antimicrobials or any active ingredients to provid e additional functions, such as 13 
 
ascorbic acid to prevent enzymatic browning or organic acids to  provide antimicrobial 
properties. The edible coating acts by improving barrier proper ties against O 2, CO 2 and 
ethylene, moisture barrier, mechanical resistance, by retention  of volatiles and functional 
compounds. 
Operational Steps – Minimally Processed Fruits & Vegetables 
Operational steps of minimally processed fruits and vegetables includes harvesting, transport, 
pre-cooling, chilling storage,  whole produce washing, sorting a nd grading, cooling and 
trimming operation. During these process operations the tempera ture should be maintained 
between 5 to 10 °C, except during harvesting where the temperat ure should be between 25 to 
30 °C. The temperatures should be maintained in each and every step so that any possible 
destruction of the nutrients a nd change in the composition of n utrients bioactive in fruits and 
vegetable could be minimized. 
After trimming operation, the pr oduce enters the processing are a which is a clean area. The 
produce is disinfected either by convention washing with disinf ectants or by ozonation or by 
using natural preservatives. The disinfection step is followed by rinsing, dewatering and spin 
drying, weight and optional mixing. After processing it is pack aged by active or passive 
modified atmosphere packaging or vacuum packaging or gas flushi ng before wholesale or 
cold storage and distribution.  14 
 
 
The temperature should be maintained at maximum allowable limit  during different 
operational steps to get better quality. The temperature should  be maintained between 5 to 
10°C at every step except during cold storage where it should b e stored at temperature 0 to 
1°C for long term storage without quality losses. 
Key Requirement in Minimal Proce ssing of Fruits and Vegetables 
The key requirement in minimal processing of fruits and vegetab le are Raw material of good 
quality of proper cultivar, corr ect cultivation, harvesting and  storage conditions. Strict 
hygiene and good manufacturing practices, HACCP. Low temperatur es during working. 
Careful cleaning and/or washing before and after peeling. Water  of good quality (sensory, 
microbiology, pH) used in washi ng. Mild additives in washing fo r disinfection or browning 15 
 
prevention. Gentle spin drying after washing. Gentle cutting/sl icing/shredding. Correct 
packaging materials and packaging methods. Correct temperature and humidity during 
distribution and retailing. 
 
Main requirements for the commercial manufacture of fresh pre-p eeled, sliced, grated, 
shredded fruits and vegetables produce according to the Europea n Union guidelines are 
provided as follows. There should be standard kitchen hygiene a nd tools, no heavy washing 
for peeled and shredded produce (p otatoes are an exception), pa ckages can be returnable 
containers for ‘prepared today and eaten tomorrow’ types of foo d. It is applicable to almost 
all fruits and vegetables. The s helf life of such products at 4  °C is 1 to 2 days. The customers 
are mainly catering industry, food industry, restaurants, schoo ls and other industries. For 
foods that are prepared today and eaten within 3 to 4 days, the  requirements for processing 
are disinfection by water washi ng or exposure to disinfectant g aseous agents, washing of 
peeled and shredded produce at l east with water and permeable p ackages. At 4 °C they can be 
stored for 3 to 5 days. It includes carrots, cabbages, baby lea f of iceberg lettuce, rockets, and 
songino potatoes, beet roots, acid fruits, berries and strawber ries, and the customers are 
catering industries, restaurants, schools and other industries.  For products that are intended 
for use into retailing points of sales up to 7 to 10 days befor e consumption, the requirements 
are very good disinfect ant, use of chlorine or organic acid in washing for peeled and shredded 
produce, use of permeable packages and used of additives. Such process is applicable for 
carrots, Chinese cabbages, red cabbages, potatoes, beet roots, acid fruits, berries, and 
strawberries and at 4 °C they can be stored for 6 to 10 days. T he customers for these products 
are the retail shops mainly. 16 
 
Quality Changes in Minimally Pro cessed Fruits and Vegetables 
 
Physiological Changes 
In minimally processed fruits and vegetables there will be phys iological changes such as 
enzymatic browning caused by polyphenol oxidase enzymes. Lipoox idase catalyzes 
peroxidation resulting in the f ormation of foul-smelling aldehy des and ketones. There will be 
increase in ethylene production, ethylene production leading to  physiological disorders of 
sliced fruits, such as softeni ng. The respiration activity of p roduce may increase by 20% to as 
much as 700% depending on the produce, cutting grade and temper ature. Anaerobic 
packaging conditions lead to anaerobic respiration causing the formation of ethanol, ketones 
and aldehydes. Physiological effects such as enzymatic browning  and tissue softening are 
shown in the figure provided. 
Microbial Changes 
Minimally-processed vegetables, most of which fall into medium   or sub-acidic range (pH 
5.8–6.2), higher humidity condition a nd larger number of cut su rfaces provides ideal 
environment for microorganisms development in retail establishm ents. The microbial 
populations on MPFVs were widely being represented by viruses, bacteria, yeasts and molds. 
During cold storage of minimally-processed baby-leafy vegetable s, pectin-lytic strains of 
Pseudomonas  are responsible for soft-rot symptom. An increase in storage t emperature and 
CO 2 concentration under packaging will shift composition of the mi croflora, such that lactic 17 
 
bacteria tend to predominate am ong the microbial population. So ft rot due to microbial action 
is shown in the figure provided. 
Nutritional Changes 
Studies in fresh-cut pears, apples, kiwifruits, and melons foun d that sugar level do not vary 
substantially under refrigerat ed condition. No significant chan ges were observed in the citric 
acid, malic acid and amino acid content on fruit samples stored  under refrigeration. Ascorbic 
acid and vitamin contents were shown to be influenced by atmosp heric conditions. Ascorbic 
acid and vitamin content of kiwi slices stored under 0.5, 2 and  4 kpa O 2 decreased by 7%, 
12% and 18% after 12 days st orage, respectively. 18 
 
Safety Issues with Minimally Processed Foods 
 
Factors that affect the minima lly processed fruits and vegetabl es decay and shelf life are due 
to mechanical damage that could lead to dehydration and decay a nd it may act as a vector for 
microbial growth or oxidation as enzymes may get released. Othe r safety issue is microbial 
growth like growth of spoilage  organisms and pathogens growth. Physiological aging leads to 
dehydration, increase in respira tion rate, ethylene production and loss of appearance due 
tissue softening. Biochemical changes include surface browning,  softening and loss of 
texture.  
 19 
 
Agricultural produces mostly have a neutral pH and high-water a ctivity that is favorable for 
the growth and survival of the pathogenic bacteria. The presenc e of pathogenic microbes in 
the agricultural produces can b e prevented only by good agricul tural practices (GAP) and 
good manufacturing practices (GMP). Minimal processing causes d amage to plant tissues, 
which dramatically increases t he physiological activity and lea d to senescence or deviation in 
the metabolism. Packaging may generate atmospheric modification  by respiration of the plant 
tissue, which in turn may cause fast fermentative changes and s poilage. MAP / CAP or other 
types of packaging should be us ed to ensure absence of anaerobi c respiration which will lead 
to fermentation and spoilage of the fruits and vegetables. To p revent the growth of foodborne 
pathogen in these foods, storage temperature and shelf lives ar e critical factors. The produces 
should be refrigerated during their shelf life to retard or pre vent the proliferation of 
undesirable microorganisms and t o delay biochemical changes. 
Summary 
Minimal processing mildly influences the quality characteristic s of a food whilst, at the same 
time, giving the food sufficient shelf-life during storage and distribution. Minimal processing 
can be applied through optimization of conventional methods, by  novel preservation methods 
and then by using hurdle technology. Thermal, non-thermal novel  preservation methods, 
packaging methods such as MAP, active packaging, edible coating  are used to produce 
minimally processed food. Minimal processing of fruits and vege tables may make the 
product more suspectable to physiological, mechanical and micro bial damage. Storage 
temperature and shelf-life are cr itical factors to ensure safet y of minimally processed foods. 20 
 
The reference for further read ing is provided i n the slide. 
 
 