Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
Lecture 43 
Spice Pastes, Sauces and Gravies 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:17) 
 
Hello, everybody. Namaskar. In tod ay's lecture, we will discuss  about Spice, Pastes, Sauces 
and Gravies. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:23) 
 
Here, the manufacturing technology of some common spice paste w hich are available in the 
market like chilly paste, ginger paste, garlic paste will discu ss. Tamarind sauce and its 
manufacturing technology will be  discuss and also about the rea dy-to-eat spice gravies. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:50) 
 
Spices not only enhance the sensory appeal of food products, bu t also they have several 
bioactive compounds and the processing of a spice product into paste helps in convenient 
addition to food products given the busier lifestyle of the con sumers. So, it is basically in the 
prepared form so that the consumers they can easily add it into  the food and get the desired 
taste and flavors. 
Upon suitable treatment such as pasteurization, these pastes ca n be marketed as FFCG item. 
The cooking paste segment is ga ining popularity among professio nals, students, travelers, and 
chefs, in both urban as we ll as in rural areas. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:47) 
 
Chilly paste, let us discuss about it. Green chilly is an India n spice which is well-known for its 
fiery taste. Green chilly paste i s prepared by grinding the was hed green chilly into fine paste. 
It is mostly used during cooking dishes such as vegetables, san dwiches, curries, vadas, etc.  So, 
the impact of processing on the chilly paste if we discuss then  green chilly paste would lose 
flavor and aroma during grinding process, if the process is not  carried out properly. Also, the 
proper sorting of green chilly requires to be done and improper  sorting would lead to spoiled 
product. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:36) 
 
So, the different steps in the preparation of green chilly past e includes harvesting, sorting 
grading, destemming, then cleaning, grinding, addition of ingre dients, finally packaging and 
storage. So, these are the steps involved in the preparation of  the green chilly paste. Then as 
far as the harvesting is concerne d, the chillies should be harv ested from the plant at the right 
stage of maturity. Roughly, it is considered that after 2 to 3 months, the green chilly plant would 
start giving fruit, and if the crop is picked when it is over-m atured then it may result into lower 
yields, but the value of the fin al product may be a little bett er. 
So, as far as the selection of g reen chillies is concerned obvi ously the green chillies are first 
inspected thoroughly to avoid any damage and spoiled parts. The y are ripened at ambient 
temperature. The variety and maturity of the fruit is considere d a priority that is specific 
varieties and specific maturity  is required for getting desired  quality products. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:03) 
 
Removal of decayed and moldy fruit is done to ensure that the f inal paste will not have any 
microbial load, or undesirable fl avors, or mycotoxin contaminat ion. Also, to avoid this, the 
proper sorting and grading is done. And then, de-stemming is an  important operation here. It 
is the process of removing the upper green cap from the chilly.  It is done manually in a smaller 
scale plant as well as in larger scale industries. De-steaming machine is available which is used. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:44) 
 
Then washing, normally 10 to 100 PP M chlorine water is consider ed a good washing agent, it 
has some sanitizing effect also, it removes dirt and other comp ounds from the chilly. Then 
grinding is done with the other ingredients like salt, oil, aci dity regulators like acetic acid, citric 
acid, etc. 
Chilly is converted into a fine paste using a suitable grinding  machinery like stone grinder. 
Then it should be packed in inert rigid and transferable contai ners and stored in cool, dry and 
hygienic place which is away from sunlight. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:48) 
 
Ginger paste is a viscous product prepared by mincing ginger rh izome to obtain a fine semi-
solid mass. Ginger paste is slightly yellow white and smooth to  coarse in texture. Ginger paste 
is often used with the  garlic paste like as  “ginger-garlic past e”.  
“Ginger-garlic paste” is a crushed mixture of raw ginger and ga rlic close together. And 
optionally, salt is added to the  ginger paste while crushing. A nd this compound mixture is often 
used in curries, in vegetable dishes in many parts of India and  it is frequently available in the 
market. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:38) 
 
Process for the raw ginger paste preparation, here, ginger is h arvested from the field, then 
sorting/grading, cleaning, peeling are the obvious treatment, a fter that it is subject to the 
pulping, addition of salt or prese rvatives, pasteurization to a round 82°C and filling at 75 to 
80°C and then cooling and stora ge. So, from ginger you get fina lly ginger paste. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:09) 
 
As far as the harvesting of the ginger is concerned, in the fig ure, because these are the tubers 
and found in underground. So, they are harvested by digging ent ire plant and although it may 
be harvested at any stage of m aturity, but the best time is whe n the plant is 8 to 10 months old. 
The ginger is typically available in two forms, one is the youn g ginger which is usually 
available only in the Indian m arket and does not need any peeli ng. Whereas the mature ginger 
has a tough skin and it need s to be properly peeled. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:51) 
 
The high quality of f resh ginger rhizome for paste should be ri ch in the color, ar oma and taste. 
Gingers are separated on the basi s of surface colour, shape, si ze, weight, soundness, firmness, 
cleanliness, maturity and those attributes which make it free f rom foreign matter. If there is any 
disease or insect damage or mechanical injury, then those shoul d all be discarded. Selection 
may be done manually or mechanically. 
There are mechanical sorters available. Sorting is also done by  hand or machine to remove the 
gingers which are unsuitable for processing due to mechanical i njuries, insect, disease, 
immaturity or over maturity and so on. So, removing damaged pro duce from the healthy ones 
reduces losses by preventing secondary contamination. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:53) 
 
Cleaning is an important operation that is in any fruit, vegeta ble, spices, the cleaning and 
washing should be proper because gingers they are dig from the soil, so they are likely to be 
contaminated with the soil partic les, muds, etc and also bacter ial contamination may be more. 
So, they should be properly wa shed and cleaned and even sanitiz ed using chlorine water and 
such other agents. 
Then cleaning is followed by peeling. A peel is required to be removed, the inedible portion at 
the initial stage of processing. If the peeling is not done the n it makes the ginger paste coarse 
and it impacts its taste. 
So, currently peeling is carried out by either manually in the industry using knife or blade or 
even mechanical peelers also like abrasive devices, devices wit h drums, knives, blades, etc are 
available. So, depending upon the industry requirement and size  of the plant they normally go 
either mechanical peeling or manual peeling. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:12) 
 
Then next operation is the pulping by ginger grinding machine w hich can be seen here in the 
figure. The washed and peeled ginger are made into paste using a crushing machine and it is 
then put into pulping machine to obtain the paste of uniform co nsistency. And automatic ginger 
grinding machines can be used t o produce fine, semi moist puree  and paste. 
Then after the pulp is made, in this, certain preservatives and  salts are added. The ingredients 
such as seasonings like salt, turmeric, and water if required c an be added to the desirable 
quantities for giving desired fl avor and consistency. Preservat ives like citric acid to the tune of 
0.1 to 0.3 percent weight by volume or ascorbic acid 1 to 4 per cent weight by volume can be 
added to increase the se lf-life of the paste. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:18) 
 
Then, another importa nt operation is the pasteurization. The pu ree or paste is heated to around 
82°C or slightly below for sufficient time to inactivate or kil l the microorganism which might 
cause spoilage. Usually, the time  ranges from 30 seconds to 30 minutes depending on the type 
of the heating system, the natu re of paste, and the size of con tainer. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:52) 
 
After pasteurization, the pasteurized paste is filled into the container using FFS machines. In 
the filling machines, the temperature normally is not lower tha n 75 to 80°C, that is, it should 
be filled while it is hot. And then it is immediately sealed to  retain the freshness of the product. 
Their paste containers come in various sizes and shapes includi ng bottles, cans, pouch packs 
and so on. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:28) 
 
Then, after packing, since it was packed hot, it needs to be co oled immediately, these are cooled 
fast to prevent the flavor loss through stack burning, which oc curs when the paste stays at high 
temperature after cooking is com plete. So, containers of ginger  may be cooled in cold water or 
by immersion in cold wa ter or by spraying th e cold air. After c ooling, the proper storage must 
be done. 
For primary packaging of the ginger paste, gas jars, stand-up p ouches, PET bottles, or 
polypropylene cups, etc. are available and all these may be put  in the secondary packaging like 
cartoon palletized unit or tertia ry packaging for transport, wh ere paper boards, cartons, or 
reusable plastic crates, etc. are used. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:29) 
 
The another important product is the garlic paste. Garlic paste  is a viscous product, retaining 
the strong aroma and flavor of the raw fresh garlic, as can be seen here in the picture. The 
product is generally creamy-white , or off white in color. Garli c paste is mainly used as a spice 
in culinary preparations for imp arting a characteristic fresh g arlic flavor. 
It is a ready-to-use preparation and that can be used in place of fresh garlic cloves in home, 
restaurant and in institutional catering. The raw material to m ake the garlic paste are the garlic 
bulbs that is the bulbs with a high volatile oil content may be  0.2 to 0.4 percent and it should 
be free from infection. Then the common salt and the permitted acidulant like citric acid and 
acetic acid are used in its preparation. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:35) 
 
The process flowchart for prepar ation of garlic paste include g arlic clove suppression, peeling, 
washing, crushing, pulping, additi on of preservatives, pasteuri zation, homogenization, and 
finally, packing. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:50) 
 
So, for separating th e garlic cloves, a g arlic breaking machine  is designed. And here the garlic 
bulbs are used and are separated into garlic cloves. The machin e is equipped with standard 
rubber soft rollers, so it imitates squeezing and rubbing actio n and will not damage the garlic 
during the bulb separation or c love separation process. 
The separation rate could be as high as 97 to 98 percent in dif ferent machines and the adjustable 
gaps between the roller allow to  separate bulbs of different si zes also. A built-in drought fan 
helps aspirate the separated garlic skin peels with stem, thus giving separated cloves as the 
output. Additionally, a horizontal conveyor with controlled spe ed or a sorting table may be 
deployed by the user to visually c heck the separated cloves and  to remove infected or damaged 
cloves. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:05) 
 
Then these cloves are peeled that is the peeling include consis ts of removing the thin papery 
skin which is tightly adhered to the clove. And two types of pe elers are generally adapted by 
the industry, it is abrasion-t ype peeler, or pneumatic-type pee lers. In the abrasion-type peelers, 
garlic cloves are fed in a stain less-steel drum with rotating v ertical shaft with rubber pads. 
Clove’s skin get skimmed off due t o abrasive contact with rubbe r pads and other cloves of the 
garlic. This inbuilt blower secti on near outlet blows away the skin to dust collection box via 
aluminum pipe and peeled cloves are collected in a separate out put bin. In the pneumatic-type 
peeler, cloves are fed in a cyli ndrical peeling chamber and pee led cloves are discharged at the 
bottom. 
The chamber has an opening for entry of the compressed air. Bec ause of the strong air flow 
produced by the air compressor, the cyclones peels off skin of the garlic smoothly, with a 
comparatively lower damage rate.  So, the peeling is done proper ly, but damage to the cloves is 
minimal. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:40) 
 
Then the peeled cloves are washed using air bubble washing mach ine. These air bubble 
washing machines are generally e quipped with jet spraying secti on to wash. The garlic cloves 
are automatically conveyed to spraying section by the conveyor belt where it is properly 
washed and then it is dried. The machine drying unit can be fur ther equipped with ozone 
generator for sterilization and disinfection according to the u ser's requirement. 
Additionally, an automatic garlic clove air dryer may be deploy ed by the user. So, the machine 
can be used effectively to remove water droplets on the surface  of the garlic cloves, before it is 
passed to the crushing section, because if the surface moisture  is not removed, then it may 
increase the moisture content of the paste and which may encour age a microbial growth. The 
flat conveyors may be used to tra nsfer the cloves between the m achine.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:50) 
 
Then the crushing and pulping of the washed and peeled cloves, that is the washed and dried 
cloves fall into the first rough grinder or crusher mill, where  they are roughly ground to form 
a thick paste. Although, it has been ground once, but the paste  is still rather coarse. Thus, the 
pulper or finisher further pulve rizes the paste to obtain a fin ely ground paste. 
It is optional for the entrepreneurs to deploy a two-stage grin ding system based on his or her 
clientele and the market trend or market demand. The output thu s obtain is transport into a 
stainless-steel blending tank where preservatives are added to enable a desired shelf-life of the 
product and transfer pump may be used to transport the paste fr om crusher to pulper and also 
for transferring it to the ble nding tank and then to the kettle . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:56) 
 
Then, the paste is pasteurized. It is cooked into steam jackete d kettle to kill any microbes 
present in them. In the picture of the kettle, here, steam kett les cooked by conduction that is 
heat passes directly from the wa ll of the kettle into the paste . The steam jacket typically extends 
from the bottom of the kettle t o between two-third of the rim. 
The circulation of the steam ins ide the jacket ensures even hea ting up of the paste in the kettle. 
Steam is supplied through an external boiler. The process also reduces the extra moisture 
content in the paste. It removes the extra moisture content. Tr ansfer pumps may be used to 
transfer paste from the pulper to kettle and also to transfer i t to the homogenizer. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:46) 
 
The homogenizer pushes the past e through very small hole. In th e homogenizer there are very 
fine holes and the paste is pushed through that and here it und er pressure it breaks down the fat 
and therefore reduces the partic le size of the fat. And it give s a uniformly homogeneous mass. 
So, homogenization gives a garlic  paste a creamier and more uni form consistency. 
And here, transfer pumps may be used to transfer the paste from  jacketed kettle to the 
homogenizer and also to transfer  to the packagin g bin. In the p ackaging bin, the homogenized 
paste is packed in desired pack sizes may be of 30-gram, 50-gra m, 100-gram, etc. with the help 
of automatic form fill and seal machine which is called popular ly FFS machines. 
This process typically comes imme diately after the filling proc ess. And the reason for this is to 
limit the risk of contamination, whi ch is especially important when packaging such products. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:58) 
 
Then we will discuss about tamarind sauce. Tamarind is an enorm ous source of nutrients and 
it has medicinal property. Tamarind proves out to be a prominen t source of dietary antioxidant 
and is abundant in total polyphenol s and this is the reason why  it is widely used for domestic 
and industrial purposes. Tamari nd sauce is prepared by boiling tamarind pulp in sufficient 
sugar and acid. Tamarind sauce is  the brownish b lack color and is of delicious texture. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:38) 
 
The process flow for the prepar ation of the tamarind sauce incl ude harvesting of the tamarind, 
de-lumping, soaking, pulping, pre- heating, cooking and evaporat ion, then filling and 
packaging, cooling, and storage. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:54) 
 
The fruit selection is important that fresh mature but unripe t amarind fruits are usually used for 
making the sauce. Fruits that are ripe, over-ripe, infected or damaged, they are discarded. The 
fruits are rinsed wel l in clean water. The  pods are cracked by hand and the pulps are separated 
from the broken shells. The fibers are peeled off and removed; shell pieces and seeds are also 
removed from the pulp. Then the tamarind is de-lumped manually for proper soaking. 
Tamarind is soaked for about 3 to 4 hours at 55°C in 1000-liter  capacity tanks. Here water is 
used in the ratio of 1:2. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:42) 
 
Then pulping, the pulp extractio n process involves three stages  of operation, where a de-stoner 
is used with 6 mm sieve size, it removes the seeds and large fi ber extracts pulp from the soaked 
tamarind. Then pulper which is having 2 mm sieve size, it consi sts of rotating body. Waste 
streams such as seed, fiber, skins are separated automatically here in this pulper. And then 
finally there is a finisher or refiner, where the sieve of 1 mm  is used and it is similar to pulper 
but gives a very fine pa rticle size material. 
Then preheating, the pulp is heat ed by indirect contact of stea m at around 85 ± 2 °C. Pre-
heating process also pasteuriz e the pulp by inactivating bacter ia. Tubular heat exchangers are 
particularly suited to thermal treatment of the product with th e high viscosity ranges as well as 
the products containing solid s, pulps or fibrous part.   
(Refer Slide Time: 24:56) 
 
The tubular heat exchangers are used for cooking or evaporation . The evaporation of the pulp 
along with other ingredient is p referably done in large open pa n which allow quicker 
evaporation and the heat is comparatively, low heat is used, su gar is added and the heat is to 
be kept low to dissolve it before increasing it to boil the mix ture. Pulp is then mixed with other 
ingredients and continuous s tirring/scraping is done. 
The end stage of boiling is measured by a refractometer that is  at the end of the boiling, the 
brix will be around 25°. The addi tives generally used here are sugar maybe 1 kg per kg of the 
pulp. Salt maybe 30 gram per kg pulp. Spices as per the require ment i.e. customized formula. 
And the preservative, generally s odium benzoate or potassium me tabisulfites are used. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:01) 
 
Then, glass jars are used for packing. They are filled hot to a void any risk of breaking. Glass 
jars with the screw-on lids are preferable. Alternatively, plas tic jars covered with foil lids can 
also be used for sauce packing and it cooled and filled into po lyethylene bags or pouches which 
are later heat sealed. The cont ainer must be sterilized properl y to avoid spoilage due to 
microbial contamination. 
And glass bottles need to be sterilized using boiling water and  PET containers using chlorinated 
water. Then after the filling they are pasteurized that is this  step is optional, and is generally 
for glass containers to enhance the shelf life of the packed sa uce. Glass containers are placed 
in water bath at the temperature as the bottles which are paste urized in the boiling water for 
about 45 minutes or so from the time that the water starts to b oil. 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:09) 
 
Then we will see the ready-to-eat spice gravies. These products  are retort processed because 
they are low acid food with modera te to large sized particles, hence it is easy to remove oxygen 
from the heat space by gas flush ing. The selec tion of a polymer  or its combination is based on 
requirement of the barrier properties. 
So, for preparation of the ready-to-eat gravies, the first step  is the finalize the formulation with 
the ingredient according to the formulation then heat about two  parts by weight of the fat to 
about 120°C and then add the starc h ingredient to it and cook i t in the form of a first mixture. 
About 80 parts by weight of this is added to 1 part of the wate r, vinegar or vegetable juice to 
the first mixture is followed by heating the thickened mixture to boiling and then the rest of the 
ingredients are added and it is cooked, that is the mixture is cooked and mixed to obtain a 
purely homogeneous mixture. 
Finally, it is packaged and sealed. And after packaging and sea ling, it pasteurized and 
refrigerated. So, these are the  process for the preparation of spice gravy. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:48) 
 
So, the materials and process that is depending upon the specif ic ingredient in recipe, greens 
are ground, cooked, roasted, fried and mixed with spice and con diments appropriately ground, 
roasted, cooked. Premixes are dried and mixed finally or the mi xed final product is dried and 
packed, so as the case may be, the se materials are prepared. 
Normally, the raw material which is used for a spice gravy incl ude onions, ginger, garlic, 
tomato, chilly, turmeric, coriander, salt, coconut, tamarind po wder, curry leaves, Bengal gram, 
garam masala, cardamom, black pepper, cumin as per the formulat ion, as per the requirement. 
Then the plant and machinery used for making gravies are princi pal equipment such as ball 
chopper, wet grinder, tray dryer, plate grinder, planetary mixe r, heat sealer, etc. and auxiliary 
equipment maybe plastic containe rs, gas burners, weighing scale s and so on. 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:51) 
 
And then important thing is that these are the retort pouch. Th e retort pouch is a special package 
in which the perishable food items are preserved by physical an d or chemical means. It is a 
flexible laminate, which can withstand thermal processing and c ombines the advantage of the 
metal can and the boil-in-bag. In India, 3-ply laminate consist ing of PET, aluminum foil and 
polypropylene is commonly used f or retort packed RTE foods. 
The product packed in such laminates has a shelf-life of about one year or more. The other 
material generally used in the retort pouch structure include n ylon, silica coated nylon, ethylene 
vinyl alcohol or polyvinylidene chloride. Also, the retort pouc h can save about 60 percent 
energy while processing. 
Furthermore, as the product is already sterile, it does not req uire additional low temperature 
storage because this retort pouch es are sterilized until they a re not opened, they can kept under 
normal conditions. 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:07) 
 
So, finally, I will summarize tha t as spice pastes are importan t and use in ready-to-use, ready-
to-eat foods. Spices are available plenty in the market. Howeve r, there are certain precautions 
which need to be taken that particularly the grinding process o peration, pre-treatments, 
packaging, etc. should be done under proper conditions otherwis e there may be a danger of 
removing the separation of the s yrup and water separation or ba cterial contamination, etc. 
So, proper sterilization, proper packaging is required even in the ready-to-eat garlic paste. They 
are also packed in the small tubes, small sachets, etc. So, nov el technologies for processing and 
packaging of these paste gravies and sauces are very important,  so that their functionalities, 
their characteristic, flavor and aroma is retained. Care should  be taken to ensure that during 
processing these flavorings are not lost. 
(Refer Slide Time: 32:27) 
 
These are the references used inside this lecture. Thank you ve ry much for your patience 
hearing. Thank you. 
