1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Proc essing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation Crop 
Products 
Professor H. N. Mishra 
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Te chnology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 34 
RTE Fruit Products 
 
 
The concepts covered in this lecture are ready-to-eat (RTE) fru it products, technology for the 
manufacture of common RTE fruit products such as fruit leather,  raisins, and fruit chips. 
 
RTE fruit products 2 
 The ready to eat products refers to those products which are re ady for direct consumption, 
without any preparation. A fast- paced herbal lifestyle, increas ing dominance of nuclear family 
structure, raising disposable income, and convenience of use ha ve made the RTE foods very 
popular, and particularly RTE fruit products because these frui ts they are considered as a hub of 
health promoting components, micronutrients, macronutrients etc . So, the RTE fruit products are 
gaining more and more popularity among the consumers now. 
The three common categories of RTE fruit products produced in t he industries are leather, chips 
and dehydrated fruits like raisins, dates, mango leather, thick  banana chips, pineapple chips and 
so on. All these products requires removal of moisture by one o r other means by using a suitable 
drying technique. The heart of all this process is the drying a nd dehydration. In other words, the 
natural sugars present in the initial material are concentrated  and gives the desired sensory and 
other characteristics, and also improves the shelf-life of the product. 
 
Fruit leather 
The fruit leathers are dried sheets of fruit pulp which have a soft, rubbery texture, and a sweet 
taste. These are chewy, flavorful, naturally low in fat, high i n fiber and carbohydrates, and are 
also lightweight and can be easily stored and packed.  
However, in their preparation, certain innovative/novel technol ogies are needed, because in 
drying of these fruits and vegetables for the preparation of le ather, loss in color, bioactives, 
nutrients etc. is very high which makes the product not likeabl e by the consumers. The market 
available leathers are mostly made from apple, guava, jackfruit , kiwifruit, mango, pineapple, 
grape and pear. Any fleshy or pulpy fruit is suitable for makin g a leather. Mango leather is the 
most common and in villages it is easily available by ‘Aam papa d’.  3 
 
 
Process flowchart for manufac turing of fruit leathers 
In the figure, the process flowchart for manufacturing fruit le ather is shown. This process is 
applicable to all fruits. Only depending upon the type of fruit  used, some treatments may differ. 
The first step is selecting ripe fruits. The obvious treatment of washing, peeling, then seed 
removal (in case of mango or similar fruits) where the seed ker nels are removed. After that, the 
pulp is extracted and heated to around 75 to 80 °C for a few minutes. The heated pulp is strained 
to remove fibrous materials, then it is added with the citric a cid and sugars. After that, it is 
boiled, then sheeted. It is spread in the form of a thin sheet in a container or in a tray, followed 
by drying at around 55 to 60 °C for about 15 to 16 hours. The final moisture content of these  
leathers may be 14 to 15 %. Finally, it is packaged and stored.  
 4 
 Unit operations involved in pr ocessing of fruit leathers 
Washing  
Washing is necessary as it remove soil, chemicals, fertilizers etc. There are various ways by 
which washing can be achieved such as soaking, spray washing, a nd flotation washing. During 
washing extra care is taken so t hat the skin should not get dam aged. Otherwise, there may be 
leaching losses. Washing should be gentler in spray washing, an d all undesirable materials 
should be clean, then removed. 
 
Peeling  
After washing, next step is peeling. Peeling removes the inedib le portion (peel, seeds, and stalks 
etc.). Peeling is categorized into five types depending upon th e type of fruits used and its 
structures viz. manual peeling, chemical peeling, enzymatic pee ling, mechanical peeling, and 
thermal peeling.  
The seeds are removed from the fruits after peeling for the ext raction of pulp. The seeds can be 
discarded or can be used as by-product in value added products.   
The pulps are extracted from the fruits by either pressing or b y maceration extending for 1 hour, 
or by decoction i.e. boiling for 5 minutes. For example, in cas e of mango, the mango kernel 
powder is prepared which are very good source of valuable fat i .e. kernel oil. After that, the pulp 
is heated up to 80 °C for the removal of excess moisture and it increases the visco sity of the pulp 
and makes it suitable for molding and further operations. The h eated pulps are cooled and 
pressed manually or mechanically and passed through stainless s ieve to remove the fibrous 
materials or some fine seeds etc. in the case of guava or other  such products. 5 
 
 
 
After straining the pulp, sugar, citric acid and other preserva tives are added. Sugars also 
improves the taste and enhances the moldability of pulp. Citric  acid is added for improving the 
shelf life whereas some other kind of preservatives can also be  added depending upon the end 
application. The pulp is boiled and the purpose of boiling is t he removal of water and making it a 
suitable for molding. Basically,  it is the concentration. The w a t e r  c a n  b e  r e m o v e d  b y  d i r e c t  
boiling with continuous stirring or the evaporator can also be used for pulp boiling at industrial 
level. During boiling, appropriate novel methods should be used  to reduce the nutrient losses. 
After boiling, the next step is the sheeting of the pulp. The h eated pulps are immediately spread 
on aluminum trays smeared with butter, and this sheeted pulp ar e then kept standing for 
sometime before they are put for proper setting. And once it is  set, then it is put into the drying 
chamber. 6 
 
 
The pulp can be dried from different methods like sun drying, s hade drying, hot air drying, etc. 
In fact, sun drying is the most commonly used method in the vil lages for making mango leather. 
In general, one layer is dried, and after that another layer of  the pulp is put and then it is dried, 
then third layer, fourth layer. Layer after layer is added. The  drying is done at 55-60 °C for 15-16 
h up to the moisture content of 14.5 % wb. The dried pulp are c ut into pieces, wrapped in butter 
paper and packed in polyethylene bags. The addition of up to 10  % sugar to the extracted pulp 
was found to be ideal before drying the pulp to a moisture cont ent 14.5 %. 
 
Physico-chemical properties of fruit leathers 
Water activity is very important, because in fruit leather as t he concentration and addition of 
sugar takes place which binds the water. The fruit leathers hav e intermediate water activity range 7 
 of around 0. 6 to 0.7. The pH values reported in the literature  for fruit leathers ranged from 3.2 to 
5.8 depending upon the fruit used. The fruit leather should hav e resistance to remain unbroken 
during processing, packaging and handling. These leathers with high resistance is difficult to 
chew, while those with low toughn ess tends to stick to the teet h; therefore, moderate resistance 
to the deformation is desired. 
 
In order to retain the bioactives, vacuum drying, freeze-drying , and microwave-assisted hot-air 
drying are used. Drying at high temperature occurs in shorter t imes and inactivates enzymes 
which results in fruit leathers with high phenolic contents. So metimes, starches and their 
derivatives are added to decrease the oxidation of phenolic com pounds during fruit leather 
production. The starches reduce oxygen permeation into the stru cture.  
 8 
 Raisins 
Raisins are basically the dried grapes. These are produced in m any regions of the world and may 
be eaten raw or are used in cooking, baking and many other purp oses. India also produces a 
significant amount of good quality raisins. Raisins contains ph enolic compounds and 
antioxidants in huge quantities which are essential for boostin g the health of the people. In the 
presence of certain enzymes, these compounds cause the browning  reactions during pretreatment 
and drying, which plays an important role in the appearance of the raisins. In fact, the outward 
color development and glassy nature, just the other raisins are  different, there is appearance and 
glassy natures are available. It is done by properly controllin g the pretreatment and the drying 
process parameter. Thus, it is necessary to select suitable pre treatment and cost-effective drying 
technique to convert grapes into raisins. 
 
Preparation of raisins 
The main steps for the preparation of raisins are discussed. Th e grapes are taken at proper 
maturity, the viticulture is very important now in India, then it is given to certain pretreatment, 
and then finally, drying. The other obvious operations like was hing, cleaning, sorting etc. must 
be carried out initially. The pre treatment may be either chemic al pretreatment or physical 
pretreatment, and next comes the drying. The drying method, the  conventional trying method or 
the novel drying methods can be used. In order to get the bette r quality, novel technologies for 
pretreatment as well as drying of grapes are of utmost importan ce. Drying may be carried out in 
to two or three stages, to get the end product of proper charac teristics which are packed and 
stored.  9 
 
 
Pretreatments of grapes 
There are there types of pretreatment available for grapes, som e are explained below. The 
chemical methods for pretreatment. In the chemical pretreatment , the grapes are dipped into 
specific chemical solutions at favorable temperature for the re quired time, and this is basically 
done to solubilize the waxy lay er and quickly remove waxes from  the grapes. This removal of 
wax results in a faster drying rate. The widely used chemicals for pretreatment of grapes include 
sodium carbonate, potassium carbonate, sodium hydroxide or even  sometimes an oil emulsion 
like ethyl oleate or olive oils etc. Sodium hydroxide causes so ftening of grape skin, which results 
in easy permeability, and thus increases the drying rate. Dippi ng of grapes in sodium hydroxide 
solution has also resulted in du ll and pale raisins. Ethyl olea te causes dissolution of the waxy 
component of grapes and improves the drying rate. It reduces br owning and is considered better 
than the hot water treatment. 
When the grapes are pretreated with potassium carbonate, the dr ying process is improved. 
Potassium carbonate causes partial breakup of ester bonds prese nt in the pectin of waxy layer, 
thus resulted in faster removal of moisture during drying, and the drying operation is fast. 
The moisture diffusion rate as w ell as the raisin quality can b e enhanced using a possible 
combination of chemicals instead of a single chemical. The comb ination of various proportions 
of the chemicals, like 2 % ethyl oleate, and 0.5 % sodium hydro xide, 4 % potassium carbonate, 
and 1 % olive oil, also called POTAS, EO with K 2CO 3 has shown improvement in drying rate. 
These sulfur like KMS, not only increases the drying rate but a lso reduces the browning 
reactions by inhibiting the polyphenol oxidase enzyme. However,  an excessive amount of sulfur 
dioxide may abruptly change the quality of the processed raisin s and can cause severe 
environmental problems.  10 
 
 
 
Physical method 
An excessive amount of chemicals and sometime their residues ca n create the food safety 
problems. So, the physical treatm ent like abrasion, water blanc hing, ohmic heating, microwave 
heating, pulse electric field, ultrasound etc. can be used whic h employ mechanical force, thermal 
energy and even non-thermal technology to improve the drying ra te as well as appearance and 
other characteristics of the product. 
In abrasion, a shaker having walls covered with an abrasive coa ting are used for abrasion 
treatment. Abrasion causes four-time increment of mass transfer  compared to untreated samples. 
However, the treatment also resulted in darker raisins compared  to the chemically treated, due to 
the activation of polyphenol oxidase enzyme by opening up the m icropores. 11 
 Water blanching is simple, easy, cost-effective and easily adop ted method. However, during the 
extraction in water blanching, there are high chances of extrac tion of colored pigments in the 
blanching water which reduced the bioactive components.  
 
Ohmic heating can be used as a novel pretreatment of grapes in which an alternating current 
(AC) is passed through the grapes causing heating due to the re sistance offered by grapes. The 
formation of microcracks on the grape surface by ohmic heating can enhance moisture diffusion 
rate. 
Microwave heating causes rapid evaporation of water and consequ ently partial puffing of the 
grapes. Thus, porosity of the grape is increased which enhances  the rate of drying by nearly two 
times compared to untreated rais ins. Further, sensory character istics also get retained due to 
inactivation of enzymes. 
Pulse electric field treatment, when applied to fruit material,  resulted in cell damage and 
softening of tissues which causes increase in water movement fr om the grapes during drying. 
The color of PEF treated samples is similar to that of the chem ically treated samples or even 
untreated samples. The market acceptability of PEF treated rais ins is reported to be higher than 
that of chemically treated or untreated raisins.  
Ultrasound treatment also can be induced. It induces cavitation  that affects the porous structure 
of the grapes. As a result, the drying rate of ultrasound treat ed grapes increased compared to 
untreated grapes, and also, the dried raisins, it has a good te xtural characteristics. 
 12 
 
 
 
Recent advances in technology f or the pretreatment of grapes 
The quality of the final raisin, to a great extent, depends upo n the pretreatment of the grape and 
then finally, of course, the dry ing technology. Some recent tec hnological advances are discussed 
such as carbonic maceration pretreatment method which utilizes carbon dioxide for loosening 
grape surface structure; microwave hydro-diffusion and gravity method which utilizes 
microwave energy for quick moisture removal, where water secret e out of the grape and is 
collected; and the third method is high-humidity hot-air impedi ment blanching, where hot air 
with the high humidity at high v elocity is applied on the surfa ce of the grapes. 13 
 
 
Carbonic maceration pretreatment method 
It reduced the drying time by 31 % and retained the total pheno lic content by 30 % as compared 
to the untreated raisins. The color retention of raisins from t he carbonic maceration treatment 
was also reported to be better than the chemical methods like e thylene oleate solutions. 
The process of carbonic maceration is as follows. The grapes ar e placed in a closed tank and the 
tank was filled with high concentration CO 2. Then, holding for an optimized time in that tank 
was done, CO 2 gets soaked by the grapes, and then intracellular fermentation  b e g i n s  w h i c h  
improves the water movement from the grapes. 
 
Microwave hydro-diffusion and gravity method  14 
 It is commonly known as MHG. It uses electromagnetic waves whic h causes rapid heating of 
water inside the grapes resulted in quick evaporation of water from the grape cells and rapid 
retention of the moisture content. During the diffusion of wate r, some soluble constituents which 
are rich in nutrients like antioxidant, polyphenols etc. secret e from grapes and are collected by 
gravity at the bottom of the equipment. Thus, the process is kn own as microwave hydro-
diffusion and gravity. MHG process preserves high amount of ant hocyanins, phenolic 
compounds, and antioxidants in a very less processing time of 1 0 min. This makes the process 
economically viable for grape processing. Moreover, no residue is generated during the 
manufacture of raisins and grape extracts. Thus, it promotes a circular chain production, and it 
gives a very good quality raisin. 
 
High humidity hot air impingement blanching (HHAIB)  
The schematic representation is shown here. This technology is a combination of high humidity 
air blanching and impingement technology, which generally resul t in quick, uniform, minimum 
nutrient loss and energy efficient process. The HHAIB technolog y improved the drying rate by 
forming the microcrevices on the surface of the grapes that led  to lesser resistance of water to 
diffuse from the center to the peel of grapes during drying. 
Drying technologies of grapes for raisin production   
A variety of drying technologies can be used for the production  of raisins from grapes. However, 
novel thermal or non-thermal drying techniques are the necessit y to retain the product 
characteristics with least nutrient loss. The open sun drying c onsists of spreading grapes in direct 
sunlight until the required dehydration. The advantages are sim plicity, feasibility, low-cost, and 
low-temperature of drying. However, some of its common drawback s are high drying time, 
weather dependency, possibility of mold growth and insect conta mination, unable to control the 
conditions, attacks of birds bodies etc. 15 
 In the shade drying, the grape bunches are placed in a dark ope n place away from sun exposure 
in a proper airflow condition, and usually they are maintained by the surrounding environment. It 
uses the solar energy without direct sun rays on the grapes. Sh ade drying of grapes usually 
resulted in a better color quality of raisins than the sun dryi ng mainly because of the no direct 
effect on the sun rays on the grapes. 
 
 
Hot air drying is also known as tray drying, uses hot air as a medium to make temperature 
gradient between grapes and air with simultaneous removal of mo isture. It is considered to be a 
good alternative compared to the sun drying of grapes. But the novel methods of drying like 
microwave drying produces raisins with highest ascorbic acid co ntent, highest rehydration ratio, 
good color properties lower shrinkage than the hot air drying. This uses a sequential change in 
drying chamber pressure between atmospheric pressure and vacuum  for enhancing the moisture 16 
 transfer. The pulsating changes of the pressure resulted in the  tunneling effect                     
regenerate the porous structure of fissure in the peel surface and enhance drying.  
 
I n  m i c r o w a v e - a s s i s t e d  a i r  d r yi n g,  h ot  a i r  i s  c o m b i n e d wi t h m i c r owave heating to enhance the 
drying rate. It accelerates the moisture transport from the ins ide of the particle to outside, reduces 
the drying time, and improves retention of color. When infrared  waves fall into the highly moist 
food such as grapes, some parts of energy get absorbed, reflect ed, and only a fraction of the 
infrared spectrum passes into the material. First, the surface of the grape is heated through the 
infrared waves, and then due to temperature difference, the hea t is transferred to the interior of 
the grapes. The intense heating decreases temperature gradient within a short interval of time and 
it results in grape drying, mainly by moisture migration in the  vapor phase. 
 17 
 Fruit chips 
The third category of the popular important dried RTE product i s the fruit chips. They have 
become increasingly popular in the diet of the modern consumers  because not only they can 
extend shelf life but also provide a purely crispy mouthfeel, a nd they provide good nutrition. 
Different kinds of fruit chips available in the market are appl e chips, carrot chips, jackfruit chips, 
pineapple chips, pear chips or even the potato chips are very c ommon products. 
 
Jackfruit chips 
The methodology for all these chips preparation is almost same.  Depending upon the type of fruit 
or vegetables, some minor adju stment in the processing conditio ns are made or sometimes one or 
two unit operations are changed. For jackfruit chips preparatio n, mature jackfruits are taken, then 
basic unit operations such as washing, sorting, peeling, deseed ing, etc. are done. After that, 
peeled jackfruit was cut into 4/5 cm × 2/1.5 cm slices. These s lices are blanched in a brine 
solution in case of apple or pota to chips as enzymatic darkenin g is very common there.   
In case of jackfruit, the jackfruit is dipped into 0.1 % KMS is  used at 90 °C for 10 min. In the 
potato chips, it is generally boiled for 2 to 4 min so that gel atinization of the starch also takes 
place, and it is important to slice, the thin slices are fully cooked. So, then after that the draining 
of the water, i.e. the surface water is removed by keeping it i n for 10-15 min, and then finally it 
is put into the dryer. So, appropriate drying, there is normall y tray drying, 60 °C for 1 h or 70 °C 
for 6 h. In drying, for initial first hour, crust formation is taken on the surface and then 
temperature is raised to 70 °C, and it continues around 6 hours, 7 hours or so. So, this aga in, 
drying condition here is depending upon the fruits or even nove l methods of drying like 
microwave drying, vacuum drying etc. will give better quality p roducts. 18 
 So, after drying, these materials are packaged and sent to the markets and at the time of 
consumption, they are fried in the oil, salted and used. They a re also made available in the form 
of ready to eat or like there is after drying, they are fried i n oil, salted, spiced and smeared with 
seasonings in the industry only. Finally, they are transported and stored at ambient condition 
after packaging. 
But packaging is important aspect because these are normally th e chips, they contain 
comparatively lower moisture content, maybe 3 to 4 percent mois ture content. They are highly 
hygroscopic. So, during, if the packaging is not good, so they may have charged moisture and 
their crispiness for which these chips etc. are known, may get adversely affected. 
 
Banana chips 
Green bananas are taken, washed, peeled, and sliced into thin s lices. These slices are blanched 
into the hot water blanching, dried, fried, salted and seasonin gs etc. are added, and then they are 
packaged. 
And these banana chips, they are deep fried snacks that are ver y popular now in many countries. 
Even India produce a significant of banana chips, and it is exp orted even, to many other 
countries. It contain good amount of magnesium, Vitamin A, iron , phosphorus, potassium in 
small quantities. 19 
 
 
Summary 
The important thing in order to make RTE products is pretreatme nt as depending upon the type 
of the fruit pretreatment will change. In the form of pulp, the se pulps are dried and so that its 
shelf life is improved, or the materials are dried and converte d in the form of raisins or dried 
chips et cetera. But in all the case, that is to make them stab le by using one or the other methods, 
the moisture is removed. The pre treatments like blanching, dryi ng, all those things, as far as 
possible, improved method should be used so that the product qu ality can be retained for which 
these fruits and vegetables are known. The packaging material c haracteristics becomes 
important. Otherwise, these produc ts are known for their crispy  t e x t u r e  a n d  g o o d  s e n s o r y  
characteristics. If they are not properly packaged, then they m ay absorb moisture and their whole 
purpose may get defeated. Their shelf-life and eating quality a nd sensory characteristics may be 
adversely affected. 20 
 
 
 
These are the references used. Thank you. 