1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Processing Fruits, Vegetables, Spices and Plantation Crop 
Products  
Professor H. N. Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 23 
Intermediate and High Moisture Fruit  Products  
 
The topic covers intermediate moisture foods,  different technologies for production of 
intermediate moisture foods  (IMF) , technologies for preparation of different  IMF, novel 
technologies for preservation of IMF , high moisture fruit products  (HMFP), and processing 
and preservation of HMFPs . 
 
 
2 
 Intermediate moisture foods  
IMF typically contain 20 to 50 % (w/w) moist ure content. The aw of IMF is between 0.75 and 
0.85. The products are generally considered as microbiologically stable at  room tem perature. 
In general, IMF maintain some certain initial characteristics  (colour, texture and flavour) of 
fresh f ood products. The unique features that make IMF appeal to consumers include conceived 
microbial safety, desirable odours, high nutritional value s, ready to eat (RTE).  As shown in 
figure, the water activity in the range of 0.7 -0.85 is considered as intermediate moisture 
content . These are  the some of the products made from papaya , pineapple , apple , banana , which 
are available in the market with  intermediate moisture food .  
 
Purpose of IMF  
To achieve a desirable water activity by various ingredients so that food product maintain 
enough water for palatab ility and can be stored safely. Addition of preservatives provides the 
margin of saf ety against spoilage organisms. Staphylococcus aureus  is one of the organism of 
high concern which can tolerate aw as low as 0.83 -0.86 under aerobic condition.  Common 
examples of intermediate moisture foods include jams, jelly, candies, baked goods, honey,  and 
semi dried fruits and vegetables.  
 
3 
  
Development of IMF/HFMP  
The raw materials are taken and common treatments are carried out such as selection , washing , 
cutting , peeling , blanching, soaking (addition of sugar syrup and additives), equilibration for 
5-10 days with gentle stirring at least twice a day  and getting the water activity in normal form 
that may be up to 0.93 -0.98 and pH  is 3 to  4.1, followed by separation, where s weetened juice 
will be collected, packaged, and stored. After drying, the IMFs will be packed and stored.  
 
Examples of traditional IMF products  
The table shows some examples of traditional intermediate moisture food products, 
particularly, from fruits and  vegetable origin, their water activity ranges, and the principal 
humectants  applied. For example, the water activity of sugared fruits ranged from 0.57 -0.79 
and sucrose is the principal humectant. Honey is also considered an intermediate moisture food . 
Its water activity  varied between 0.58 -0.68.  Here  sucrose or other  sugars may be present . The 
water activity of chutney sauce is  0.86. Here , sodium  chloride or  some food acids are used .  
4 
  
Microogranisms growing in a w range of IMFs  
Most molds ( Mycotoxigenic penicillia ), most Saccharomyces  spp. (e.g., Saccharomyces bailii , 
Debaryomyces ) are generally inhibited at aw of 0.80 -0.84, for example, m ost fruit juice 
concentrates, chocolate syrup, maple and fruit syrups, fruitcake.  Most halophilic bacter ia, 
Mycotoxigenic aspergilli  are inhibited at a w of 0. 75-0.80, for example, jam, marmalade, 
marzipan, some marshmallows.  Osmophilic yeasts ( Saccharomyces rouxii ), few molds 
(Aspergillus echinulatus , Monascus bisporus ) are inhibited at a w of 0.60 -0.65, for example, 
dried fruits containing 15 -20% moisture, some toffees and caramels, honey.  
 
Fruits as IMF  
Fruits can tolerate pH reduction without a ffecting flavour significantly. Minimum addition of 
humectants for a w reduction to maintain freshness. To compensate stability, for the high 
moisture of the product, a blan ching treatment can be applied. pH reductions that will not result 
in flav our impairment can be employed. Permitted preservatives can be used t o reduce the risk 
5 
 of spoilage.  Combination of these factors for hurdle technology principles applied to fruits, 
results in alternative to traditional IMF fruits.  
 
Low pH (majority of fruits)  & organic acid affect growth  of acid -tolerant microb es e.g. fungi 
(predominantly molds) & lactic acid bacteria.  In fruits with high pH (e.g., banana, melon, fig, 
& papaya), the minimum pH adjusted should be compatible with natural flavour of the fruit. 
Additional hurdle of incorporating preservatives e.g. weak lipophilic acids ( i.e., sorbic or 
benzoic acid). Blanching inactivates enzymes or injures microorganisms, reduc ing the initial 
microbial load.  Sulfiting agents are used in low concentrations to inhibit nonenzymatic 
browning reactions.  
 
Technologies f or production of IMF  
The conventional methods are partial drying , moist infusion or osmotic dehydration , dry 
infusion or direct formulation , and the novel drying techniques including microwave drying, 
microwave convective air drying, combination of drying or infrared drying or even water 
6 
 activity lowering agents can be used or innovative osmotic dehydration technique like vacuum 
impregnation, osmodehydro freezing, pulsed electric field  assisted osmotic dehydration or 
ultrasound assisted osmotic dehydration can be used for production of intermediate moisture 
food.   
 
Conventional methods for production of IMF  
Partial drying  
It can be used in the production of IMF only if the starting ma terials a re naturally rich in 
humectants e.g. d ried fruits (e.g. raisins, apricots, prunes, dates, apples, and figs) and syrups 
(e.g. maple syrup).  The final aw of products is in the range of 0.6 –0.8.  
Moist infusion, or osmotic dehydration  
It involves soaking solid food pieces in a water humectant  solution  of lower water activity . The 
difference in osmolality forces water to diffuse out of the food into the solution. 
Simultaneously, the humectant diffuses into the food, usually more slowly than  the water 
diffuses out.  This process is used for production of candied fruits.  
7 
  
Dry infusion  
Dry infusion consists of first dehydrating solid food pieces and then soaking them in a water 
humectants  solution  of the desired water activity . It is more energy intensive , but it  results in 
high quality products . And it is used for preparation of IMFs for the NASA  and US military .  
Direct  formulation  
It involves weighing and direct mixing of the food ingredient s, humectants and additives , 
followed by cooking , extrusion or other treatment resulting  in the finished product of desired 
water activity . It is fast and energy efficient and  offers great flexibility in formulation . It is used 
for both the traditional  IMF like preserves candies etc as well as novel IMF like pet foods , 
snack  products .  
 
Novel drying techniques for production of IMF  
8 
 The novel techniques for the production of  IMF include the microwave or combined 
microwave drying like microwave assisted hot air drying , vacuum  microwave drying and 
microwave vacuum -freeze  drying . Infrared  drying delivers energy  to the products by 
electromagnetic waves  having  wavelength s between 0.75 and 1000 µm. So,  it can easily be 
combined with  other traditional drying met hods for industrial application s.  
 
Water  activity lowering agents for intermediate moisture foods  
The IMF can be produced by adding water activity lowering agents to reduce the amount of  
and mobility of the water and accordingly to lower the water activity . So,  lowering water 
effectivity prevents or hinders the growth of foodborne pathogens and prolongs the shelf life .  
An effective humectant  would ideall y provide the following properties  such as  it is non -toxic , 
exhibit adequate solubility in water , have a low molecular weight , show compatibility with the 
organole ptic characteristics , have low or no calorific  value , reinforce diet etic image of the food 
by adding positive functional  properties and finally it should have low cost . So, some of the 
common water  activity lowering agents which are used in IMF include sugar , low molecular 
weight polyols , protein derivatives, and minerals and organic acids .  
9 
  
The a w of an ideal solution is a direct function of the mole fraction of the solved component  
aw=Xw=nw
nw+ns 
Where,  
 aw= Water activity  
 Xw= Mole fraction of water  
 nw= Total moles of water  
 ns= Total moles of solute  
The a w of real aqueous solution is  
aw=γwXw=nw
nw+γsns 
Where,  
 γw= Activity coefficient of water  
 γs= Activity coefficient of solute  
For ideal solutions, γ s is unity. Generally, for humectants, γ s is greater than one and γ w is less 
than one.  The smaller the molecular weight of the humectant (solute), the greater is its a w 
lowering effect (humectancy) per unit of weight dissolved.  
10 
  
Vacu um impregnation  
Combining vacuum impregnation with osmotic dehydration facilitates penetration of osmotic 
solutions into porous structures of plant tissues in a controlled manner.  
Osmo -dehydro -freezing  
This technique is used to produce IMF with better textural properties and reduced structural 
collapse.  A unique advantage of this combination is that OD removes a part of water in fresh 
foods, thus reducing the available water for freezing and minimizing quality changes of food 
products upon thawing.  
 
PEF assisted osmotic dehydration  
PEF assisted  osmotic dehydration  significantly enhanced antioxidant capacity , phenolic  
content and colour retention of the , and there is a decrease in total processing time by 33 percent 
11 
 compared  to the conventional drying me thod. It produce s high-quality food products due to 
high yield, better quality, enhanced mass transfer, faster protein digestion, low processing time.   
Ultrasound assisted osmotic dehydration  
Ultrasounds (US) are mechanical waves with frequencies ranging from 20 kHz to 100 MHz 
that can transmit through solids and liquid media via alternating volumetric expansion and 
compression.  It facilitate s the removal of water from food materials thus shortening the time 
of OD, improving energy efficiency and enhancing  product quality.  
 
Preparation of jamun candy  
This is a flow diagram for  preparation of jamun candy, which includes cleaning , pulping , 
filtration , addition of ingredient s, mixing , concentration , spreading , cooling and cutting into 
different cubes . The ingredient per kg of the  fruit pulp is recommended  as shown in the table .  
 
12 
 Preparation of jam  
It includes a series of process such as washing, peeling, pulping (remove the seed and core), 
addition of sugar, boiling (with continuous stirring), addition of  citric acid, judging of end point 
(by further cooking up to 105 ᵒC or TSS of 68 to 70%), filling hot into the sterilized bottles, 
cooling, waxing and then capping.  
 
Preparation of jelly  
The preparation of jelly involves selection of firm fruit, followed by washing, cutting into thin 
slices, boiling with water for about 20 -30 min, addition of citric acid (2 g per kg of fruit), 
straining of extract, testing of pectin (for addition of sugar), addition of sugar, boiling, judging 
the end point using sheet/drop/temperature test, removal of scum or foam, filling hot into clean 
sterilized bottles, waxing, capping, and storage.  
 
Prepartion of marmal ade 
13 
 The process flow chart of m armalade is same as that of jam, but the only difference is the 
addition of shredded  peels followed by  softening of shreds after the pulp  extraction , pectin 
testing, and at the time of cooking. The rest of the process is similar to jam and jelly.  
 
Preparation of carrot cake  
The process includ es weighing  of dry and wet ingredients , fat and sugar are creamed in plenty 
mixtures . Then  eggs are added at  the rate of five regular intervals to ensure proper mixing of 
the eggs and also proper whipping  of the air . Then  maida flou r, shredded carrot , baking powder , 
vanilla essence  are added . These are  place d in a tray and bake at 180 ᵒC for 35 minutes  followed 
by cooling , slicing and packing .  
 
Dates as IMF  
This includes  harvesting of the dates from the farm , packaging of dates for the processing unit , 
sorting , removing of pit and cleaning up  the dates , washing and drying , sorting and grading of 
14 
 fruit for uniform  size date packing , metal detection , then surface coating to minimize  stickiness 
and that enhances the appearance , packaging , storage and transportation for the  markets .  
 
Processing  of honey  
This slide shows a  continuous  production and processing of honey . This involves screening of 
raw honey, storing , filtering , dewatering , liquefaction, pasteurizing, cooling, filling, capping, 
labeling, packing, storing and finally delivering.  
 
Preparation of mango leather  
Ripe mango is taken, washed, peeled, pulp is extracted, and stained it. Then 0.6 g of KMS for 
every  kg of pulp  is added, and smeared the trays with edible oil, spread pulp in thin layer on 
the trays. Dry in mechanical dehydrator may be able to 70 to 280  ᵒC for 10 minutes and then 
add a layer after layer of this mango leather.   After drying the first layer , spread the second 
15 
 layer on it and then repeat this process until thickness of the s heet is maybe 1 to 1.25 centimeter . 
Then  cut dried s heets into pieces of  suitable sizes , wrap in waxed paper and store .  
 
Novel technologies for preserving IMF  
Novel technologies for the  preservation of intermediate moisture foods include sterilization or 
packaging or  hurdle technology concept . Sterilization can be done using high-pressure  
processing , plasma treatment or  pasteurization , packaging , like edible coating , active 
packaging , modified  atmosphere packaging can be done .  
 
The figure s represent  the variation in color attributes of the thermally and high pressure 
processed jam. The high pressure process jam showed better retention of bioactive compounds 
components as well as stability as compared to thermally processed jam.  
16 
  
High -moisture fruit products (HFMP)  
Fruits with aw as high as 0.98 can be stabilized usi ng combined hurdles technology. The pH 
exert a strong selective pressure on the existing microflora. pH range of HMFP (3 - 4.1) might 
not re present the optimum for growth. pH - aw interaction in the applied ranges will be enough 
to suppress the growth of  most bacteria of  concern in fruit preservation. At high levels of aw, 
the ef fects of pH on osmophilic yeasts might be the same as for non -osmophilic yeasts.  
 
Preservation of HFMP  
Common hurdles used for providing microbial stability to the HMFP are  blanching, water 
activity depression, lowering of pH, addition of c hemical preservativ es may be sorbates or 
benzoates, and the addition of sulfite as an anti -browning agent . Food is preserved by 
interference with the homeostasis of microbes . Homeostasis is the tendency to uniformity  or 
stability in normal status (Inter nal environment) of organisms. Homeostasis is disturbed by the 
17 
 preservative fact ors (aw, pH, additives, etc.); the microorganisms will  not multiply or may even 
die. Microbial stability could be achieved with an intelligent combination of hurdles.  
 
Processing technologies for shelf -stable HFMP  
The process technology involves selection of the fruit , washing , peeling and cutting then 
blanching  using satura ted steam for 2 -3 min followed by water cooling, product equilibrium 
(addition of sugar, acid, potassium sorbate, sodium bisulphite), application of wet or dry 
infusion at atmospheric pressure at this point . Then finally, the water activity is in the ra nge of 
0.94 to 0 .98, pH 3 to 4, meta potassium sorbate  of 400 to 1000 ppm , sodium bisulfite  of 150 
ppm. T he fruit pieces are poured into glass jars or polyethylene bags filled with syrup and 
finally packaging.   
 
Shelf -stable high moisture mango slices  
18 
 The process involves selection of fruits, washing, peeling, stone removal, blanched against 
super saturated steam for 1 minute and then cool ing the blanching water , addition of sugar , 
potassium sorbate and sodium bisulfite, thus water activity is maintained 2.97, pH is 3 .0, 1000 
ppm potassium sorbate and  150 ppm sodium bisulphite, packing of mango slices into 
polyethylene bags or glass jars an d slices are covered with syrup, and finally stored at 35 ᵒC for 
4-5 months.  
 
Shelf -stable high moisture papaya  slices  
The process involves  selection of fruits, washing, peeling, seeds removal , blanched against 
super saturated ste am for 1 minute and then cooling the blanching water,  then sucrose is added 
to get the 60 Brixs TSS , 0.1% potassium sorbate , 5% citric acid and the ratio of fruit to syrup 
is 1:20. Water activity is 0.97, pH is  3.7 and 1000 ppm potassium sorbate and 150 ppm sodium 
bisulphide and then like in earlier case, here also the slices are packed into polythene bags or 
glass jars and are covered with syrup, in this jar c lear is taken and stored for 25 ᵒC for 3 to 8 
months.  
19 
  
In summary, IMF products are foods with moisture content higher than that of dry foods and 
are edible without rehydration. The unique features that make IMF appeal to consumers include 
conceived microbial safety, desirable odours, high nutritio nal values, ready to eat (RTE).  
Inhibiting microbial growth on a given substrate is not achie ved exclusively by lowering the 
aw, but rather, it is a function of all contributing hurdles i.e. aw, pH, temperature, oxidation -
reduction potential, preservatives , and existing microflora.  The shelf life of IMF can be 
extended by inhibiting microbial growth, reducing lipid oxidation and preventing the contact 
of food materi als with the outer environment. The HMFP can be stabilised using combinations 
of different h urdles that can affects homeostasis.   
 
These are the reference for further study . Thank  you. 
