1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 
Lecture 11  
Basics of Processing and Preservation 
The processing and preservation principles will be discussed ab out the basics of processing and 
preservation.  
 
The concepts include aims of f ood preservation, principles and methods of preservation and 
processing, control of pH and wa ter activity, combination techn ology concept and an overview 
of the novel and emerging tec hnology in the processing.   
 
Food safety 
2 
 In the last lecture, the various method to determine food quali ty attributes QA and QC were 
discussed. Safety is the first  prerequisite of any food. Food s afety implies the absence or 
acceptable and safe levels of contaminants, adulterants, natura l l y  o c c u r r i n g  t o x ins, or any 
hazard that may make food injurious to health on an acute or ch ronic basis.. So, the food at the 
time of its consumption should be free from any such hazards or  undesirable toxin or chemical 
components. In a broad sense, this is taken to mean that the fo od is free from any harmful 
chemical or microbiological contam inant at the time of its cons umption.  
Safety concerns in the food processing include: 
1. Microbiological contamination 
2. Contamination arising out of packaging material 
3. Contamination which may come from the chemicals or  
4. Processing or equipment which are used in the processing i.e if  they are not properly 
cleaned; they may also be a source of contaminants.  
The effect of processing on safety and quality are both interre lated which means  more severe 
processing will lead to a better safety of the product, but tha t it may also result in deterioration 
of the quality. So the particular severity level and combinatio ns of  the process parameters is 
critical  to get a food which is of good quality as well as at the same time it is safe for 
consumption.   
 
Food quality loss 
3 
 All the products following harvest may lose quality at some rat e or other in a manner that is 
highly dependent on the food type and composition formulation a nd storage. The figure 
represents that actually the value chain starting from the idea l raw material and passes through 
various stages till it reaches to the consumer’s table.  
Quality loss may be accelerated or minimized at any of the stag es and the total  preservation of 
a food is therefore often highly multi- component in that it se ldom relies on one factor alone. 
The food material which is being handled here, it is a biologic al material and various agents 
like microbiological in geometric, physical, chemical agents ar e acting on it and they bring 
about various changes. So, the pr incipal quality loss reactions  are therefore, the principal 
targets of food preservation or  food preservation technology.  
 
Major quality loss reaction 
The major quality loss react  include the following : 
1. Microbiological factors:  growth or presence of toxicogenic microorganism or there 
may be growth or presence of impact to microorganism or just gr owth of spoilage 
microorganism.  
2. Enzymatic reactions : these include hydrolytic reactions which are catalyzed by lip ases 
and proteases etc. There are reactions catalyzed by lipoxygenas e and enzymatic 
browning. 
3. Chemical reactions :  like oxidative rancidity, oxidative and reductive discolorat ionor 
nutrient losses.  
4 
 4. Physical reactions : maybe mass transfer, movement of low molecular weight 
components from one place to other and there may be loss of cri spiness, loss of flavor 
as well as freeze induced damages.  
 
Consequences of quality loss   
Processing and preservation steps are done to minimize these re actions undesirable reactions. 
So, if this quality loss is not properly controlled, the conseq uences may range broadly like poor 
keepability, changes in color, flavor and texture etc. leading to quality loss. The lower quality 
of the marketed food may reduce the marketability. 
If there is a potential microbial hazard, unacceptable rate of oxidation, unacceptable change in 
texture, its consequences may be inability to distribute and ma rket the product. But if there is 
presence of toxin and presence of a pathogenic microorganism in  the food, it may be a hazard 
to the consumer.  
The consequences of these quality loss reactions or the failure  of the technology may lead to 
lower quality of the marketed food as well as hazard to the con sumer. So, one has to be careful 
during processing and preservation  
5 
  
Major targets for antimicrobial preservation techniques 
Poisoning microorganism  
The major targets for antimicrobial preservation techniques may  be either poisoning 
microorganism as most of the spoilage in the food is caused by the microbiological reactions 
and it also may be multiplication of toxicogenic microorganisms  poisoning microorganism or 
spoilage microorganisms. The poisoning microorganism also inclu de presence or 
multiplication of infective microorganism. Few examples of infe ctive microorganism are 
Salmonella, Listeria, Campylobacter  etc. Multiplication of toxicogenic microorganism 
bacteria include Staphylococcus aurous or Clostridium botulinum . When they grow in the food, 
they produce toxin. major targeted is that these should not be presented there as well as this 
will not be allowed to grow inside the food. 
Spoilage microorganism  
Spoilage microorganism grow and multiply and may cause generati on of minor metabolic 
products like thiols, es ters, amines, peroxides, generating, di scoloration off–odors, etc.  Lipases, 
proteases, amylases, polygalact uronase etc. causing flavour and  textural changes. There maybe 
even presence of physical presenc e of the biomass like visible presence of the biomass like 
visible presence of the microorganisms for example slime, haze,  mold to colonies etc.  
6 
  
 
 
7 
  
 
Factors affecting microbial growth  
There are various favorable conditions that influence and favor  the growth and multiplication 
of microorganism in the food. 
The various factors which are aff ecting the microbial growth ar e as follows: 
1. Intrinsic factors  like the chemical and physical factors within the food from wh ich a 
contaminating microorganism i s inextricable in contact.  
2. Processing factors  are the factors which are applied to food during processing fo r 
improved preservation. These factor s also may influence the gro wth.  
8 
 3. Extrinsic factors  are those factors that influen ce microorganism in food, but, t hese are 
applied from outside the food a nd they act during storage like temperature of a storage 
environment, relativity humidit y of the storage environment etc  
4. Implicit factors  include factors that are related  to the nature of the microorg anisms 
themselves and to the interactions between them and with the in teractions between the 
microorganism and the environment , which is they are in contact  during growth. 
5. Overall in this there is a net effect , this takes into account the fact that many of the 
factors strongly influence the effects of each other on microbi al growth and survival. 
So, the overall effect of combinations of factors may not be re adily predictable but may 
be usefully greater than the pe rceived effects of the single fa ctors. 
 
Factors affecting the m icrobial ecology of foods 
The factors in this table I have summarize that all these physi cal factors, the intrinsic factors 
like chemical, nutrient, pH and buffering capacity, oxidation, reduction, potential antimicrobial 
substances. Physical that is ERH and water activity, ice and fr eeze concentration, colloidal 
changes are processing factor that changes in the food composit ion during processing, changes 
in the microbial type, changes in the microbial number or chang es in the microstructure of the 
food etc.  
Extrinsic factors is the equilibrium relative humidity during s torage, temperature during 
storage, oxygen tension etc. A nd implicit factors like microbia l growth rate that is the synergic 
9 
 effects i.e the microorganism growth leads to the favorable env ironment for the growth of the 
other microorganism or there may be vice versa that the antagon istic effect. So, all these things 
affect and these are the factors which affect the microbial eco logy of a food in general of fruits 
and vegetable in particular.  
 
Preservation  
The preservation is the treatment of food to prolong the time f or which, they can be kept before 
spoiling.  
While most preservation techniques are primarily based on the p revention of growth of the 
food spoilage and poisoning microor ganism, the preservation of other quality attri butes is also 
of major concern. A proper compromise that the both quality and  safety is properly maintained.  
 
10 
 Food preservation techniques and concepts 
The traditionally used preservation techniques work on the prin ciples of controlling those 
factors which influence the mi crobial ecology of the produce or  other spoilage agents. 
There are three set of pr eservation techniques  
1. The slowing down that is one set of factors, which slows down o r in some instances, 
complete inhibition of the microbial growth.  
2. There is other particularly that direct inactivation or killing  of the targeted bacteria yeast 
or mold, particularly if the bact eria of concern is a toxicogen ic bacteria or pathogenic 
bacteria. An adaptive method is applied which kills and inactiv ate these microorganism 
3.  there are also one set of technologies, preservation technolog ies which restrict the 
access of microorganism to the food products.   
 
Slowing down or inhibition of  growth of microorganisms 
1. Lowered temperature : The technology which work on t he principle of slowing down 
or inhibiting the growth of micr oorganism in food include lower ing of the temperature, 
because temperature is one factor which influences the rate of microbial growth rate. 
So, the lowering of the temperatu re like chill storage, or free zing and frozen storage. 
11 
 2. Nutrient restriction : where there is a compartmenta lization of aqueous phases into 
water in oil emulsions and the nutrients which are present in t he food material, can be 
compartmentalized in such a manner that the microorganism is no t able to utilize that 
particular nutrient.  
3. Decreased oxygen:  like vacuum and nitrogen packaging because oxygen is another 
factor which influ ences the growth.  
4. Increased carbon dioxide:  this include Control Atmospheric Storage (CAS) or 
Modified Atmosphere Packaging (MAS). 
5. Chemical preservatives : these are inorganic compounds s uch as sulphites, nitrites etc . 
The organic compounds such as propionate, sorbate, benzoates, p araben etc or 
antibiotics such as  nisin, pimaricin. 
6. alcoholic fermentation: could be activated by brewing, vinification or fortification. 
Apple juice and grape juice is preserved by converting it into wine to alcoholic 
fermentation. 
7. reduced water activity or raised osmolality:  like drying and freeze drying, curing 
and salting, conserving with added sugar is where the water is removed from the food 
materials this is wate r activities lower down.  
8. Acidification:  method like addition of acids, lactic or acetic fermentation l ike this pH 
management or even pickling et cetera is the process for the fr uits and vegetables which 
work on this principle.  
All these methods are based on that the bacteria or microorgani sm of the concern will not be 
killed, it just slows down or goe s into the dormant state, it g oes in the stationary phase. But 
when these factors are removed the product losses its shelf lif e. for example, you have kept a 
food material in a chili storage; as long as it is in the cold storage, the microorganism will not 
grow, but as soon as it is taken  out from there or that stress factor is removed, the 
microorganism will again find a fa vorable environment, it will grow and multiply.  12 
  
Direct inactivation of microorganisms  
The direct inactivation of micr oorganism is based on killing th e microorganisms. Some sort of 
energy is applied, ut could be either heat energy or radioactiv e energy for killing the 
microorganism. Regarding heating it may be pasteurization and s terilization a nd irradiation 
include  radurization, radicidati on and radappertization.  
So, these are the some of the technology where the energy is pu t into the food and in the 
microbial cell and the transfer of  energy kills the microorgan ism. This may result into the 
denaturation of the body enzyme system or physiological process es are adversely affected and 
microorganism particularly enzym e is inactivated resulting in m icroorganism get destroyed. 
13 
  
Restriction of access of  microorganisms to foods 
There are techniques which restr ict or access of microorganisms  in food. 
Decontamination  is lowering the level of contami nants of the packaging materia l or of the 
food like treatment of the ingred ients with by fo r example with  ethylene oxide or treatment of 
the packaging material with H 2O2 and or heat, irra diation etc.  
And then finally, aseptic thermal processing and packaging with out recontamination makes 
decontaminate the components and then packet in an aseptic envi ronment and this is the 
principle of aseptic processing  and packaging. 
 
Processing  
14 
 There is processing is the setup methods and techniques, which are used to transform raw 
ingredients into finished and s emi-finished value-added product s.  
Why do we need processing?   
 To extend the shelf life and a llow time for distribution, scale  and home storage. 
 To increase variety in the diet by providing a range of attract ive eating quality, sensory 
characteristics or organoleptic quality 
 Reduction of wastage 
 Increase in farmers income by getting better prices  
 To increase income for of the manufacturing company 
 To eradicate hunger by making food accessible with affordable t o everyone so, these 
are the objectives  of processing.  
 
Generic flow diagram for a typical food process 
This is a generic flow diagram for a typical food process for i ngredient preparation i.e., primary 
processing like sorting, grading and converting into fine powde r  o r  p a s t e  a n d  u s a g e  
accordingly.  This the ingredient preparation and these prepare d ingredients then go for scaling 
for formulation either by auto matic metering units or by indivi dual or manual metering where 
the ingredients are taken as per the formula.  
Invariably in all food process, there is a mixing operation eit her mixing up of solid to solid, 
solid to liquid, liquid to solid, liquid to gas, gas to gas so on. So, appropriate equipment and 
machinery are used for mixing as  per the formulation. And then after the mixed formulation is 
15 
 sent to the processing or the primary packaging sometime or eve n after after primary 
packaging, they are again sent for secondary processing and fur ther secondary packaging and 
utilizing and finally storage. So, this is the generic flow dia gram process flowchart for any food 
process in general.  
 
Typical steps in food product development and engineering invol vement  
These are typical steps in Food Product Development and Enginee ring Involvement that 
depends upon engineering resour ces availability or financial av ailability to identify the need 
an opportunity i.e., what is the need and where is the opportun ity, then developing the concept. 
Testing the concept; if the concept upon testing in the laborat ory is approved and can go for 
the market production. If the con cept fails in the laboratories , the concept is revised to be tested 
again.  
Sometimes the concept is tested in the laboratory, but when it goes for large or national scale 
production or market production; the technology fails. Then in that case, it can be concluded 
that there is a anomaly. Again, a new concept is developed and proceed for larger scale, but 
this timeline should be as short as possible. Otherwise, the co mpetitors may bring similar 
product into the market. 
16 
  
 
17 
  
 
SWOT of food processing  
The SWOT analysis of the food pr ocessing include the following:  
1. Strength:  Abundant   availability of raw material.  
 Priority sector is status fo r agro processing by the central go vernment. 
 There is a vast domestic mar ket of the processed food. 
2. Weakness:  There is a low availability of a dequate infrastructural facili ty 
  Lack of adequate quality control and testing methods as per in ternational standards. 
 There are inefficient supply chain due to a large number of int ermediaries is involved 
in the value chain 
 High requirements of working cap ital for most of the food proce ssing industry 
18 
  Inadequate develop linkage betw een r&d labs and the industry 
 Season availability of the raw mat erial. So, these are some of the weaknesses.  
3. Opportunity:  like large crop and market material base offering a vast poten tial of agro 
processing activities. 
 rising income levels and ch anging consumption patterns. 
 opening up global markets. 
4. Threats:  Affordability and cultural pr eferences of fresh food 
  High inventory carry cost. 
  High packaging cost. 
 
commonly used methods for proce ssing of preservation of fruits and vegetables 
commonly used methods for processing of preservation of fruits and vegetables involves the 
principle of preservation i.e.  enhancing the shelf life by food  processing, packaging and 
storage, achieving the food safety by retarding microbial growt h, eliminating microbes and 
destroying heat resistant spores and finally by improving food quality by improving the texture, 
nutritive value, odor and flavors of food.  
1. Removal of water or moisture like evaporation concentration, de hydration and  drying 
salting. 
2. Application of heat like past eurization, sterilization, smoking . 
3. Lowering of temperature like refrigeration, freezing by indirec t contact with the 
refrigerant, air blast freez ing, freezing by direct immersion.  
19 
 4. Control of oxygen like fermentation and canning. 
5. Ph reduction like pickling of fruits and vegetables. Et cetera.  And all these methods we 
will take up details of their methodology concept and the even equipment et cetera in 
the next classes.  
 
Lowering the temperature  
1. Freezing by direct immersion : Fruit may be frozen by being placed in contact with a 
metal surface which is cooled by a refrigerant or packed in a c an and is cooled by 
immersion in a refrigerant.  
2. Freezing by direct immersion:  Food product either package or unpackaged is frozen 
by immersion in or by spraying with freezant that remains liqui d throughout the 
process.  
3. Air blast freezing : The food material is to be frozen may be placed on a moving b elt 
in which the cold air is conf ined in an insulated tunnel.  
20 
  
Addition of heat   
1. Pasteurization  where the food is heated below 100°C. in acidic food it is use d to extend 
the shelf life for several months by destruction of the spoilag e microorganism and or 
enzymatic inactivation.  
2. Sterilization the food is heated to high temperature for a long time to destr oy microbial 
and enzymatic activity. Sterilized foods have a shelf life in e xcess of six months at 
ambient temperatures provided they are aseptically packed after  sterilization to avoid 
post sterilization contamination.  
3. Smoking  The addition of smoke and heat  preserve food by the action of the chemicals 
from the smoked wood and the  partial drying of the food. 
reduction of pH   
Unfavorable for the growth and multiplication of microorganism.  Then ph is unfavorable 
that is the both extreme this side. This is done by expelling t h e  g a s e s  p r e s e n t  i n  t h e  
intracellular spaces of the ti ssue or by creating barrier. 
21 
  
Control of oxygen   
1. Fermentation : Controlled action of selected micro-organisms is used to alte r the 
texture of foods, pr eserve foods by producti on of acids or alco hol, or to produce subtle 
flavors and aromas 
2.  Canning : It is a method of preservati on of food in which the food is p rocessed and 
hermetically sealed in containers  (metal, glass etc.) through a gency of heat. It gives 
extended shelf life up to 5 years. 
Removal of water/moisture 
Preservation of water or removal of water or moisture, thus try ing to the control the water 
activity.  
1. Salting : Salt kills and inhibits the growth of microorganisms by drawi ng water out of 
the cells of both micr obe and food through osmosis. 
2. Drying: Removal of water content from the food material to a desired le vel of moisture 
content. 
3. Dehydration:  Application of heat under control conditions to remove the maj ority of 
the water to equilibrium moisture  content (EMC) in a typical fo od evaporation.  
4. Evaporation : It is the partial removal of water from an aqueous solution t o produce a 
concentrated final food product.  
22 
  
Control of pH  
pH is an important factor affecting growth of microorganism in the food because it effects 
microbial energy metabolism involving the buildup of gradient h ydrogen ion (H+) 
concentration across membranes and the microbial enzymes activi ty and the stability of cellular 
microorganism.  
Moreover, pH also affects the sensory properties of many foods.  So, pH can be controlled by 
the choice of raw material and by the addition or in situ insti tute fermentation of acidic or 
alkaline low molecular weight c ompounds. So, growth of microorg anism may be inhibited by 
either low or high pH.  
 
23 
 The minimum pH for the growth of microorganism as well as the r ate of inactivation of 
microorganism by acid is affected by: 
 The nature of acidulant. 
 The presence of other inhibitory factors like no water activity , preservative low 
temperature, that may interfere with the energy metabolism or i ncrease the need of 
maintenance energy. 
 The ability of microorganism to react to acid is stressed to ma intain passive or active 
pH homeostasis.  
Passive pH homeostasis  means microorganism either prevent external protons from enter ing 
the cell or increases the buffering capacity of their cytoplasm  by synthesis of the glutamate and 
or citrate.  
Active pH homeostasis  cell maintains their cytoplas m pH through metabolic activity.  
Till the pH homeostasis is maintained inside the cell the micro be will survive and at once 
homeostasis is disturbed, the mi crobes get disturbed. So, micro organism will try to maintain 
either active, passive or active pH homeostasis. Microbes try t o manage and try to fight with 
the stress etc. and in this way t hey exhaust all their energy. 
 
Control of water activity  
Of all the factors affecting mi crobial growth, death and surviv al in a food, the influence of 
water activity (a w) on vegetative microorganism and spores has been one of the mo st important 
studies. The optimum water activ ity for growth of the majority of microorganism in the range 
24 
 of 0.99 to 0.98 and some important common microorganism spoilag e microorganism it is so 
near to this range. 
So, every microorganism has limiting water activity below which  it will not grow and it will 
not form a spore or it will not  produce toxic metabolites.  
The figure shows the relations hip between water  activity and th e progress of spoilage. The 
most important points are as follows:  
• Growth of most spoilage bact eria is inhibited at about a w 0.9.  
• Growth of most spoilage y east is inhibited at about a w 0.88.  
• Growth of most spoilage  moulds is inhibited at a w 0.7-0.8.  
 
So, the minimum a w for growth is always equal or lower than the minimum water acti vity for 
toxin production. Major advances i n the control of water activi ty as a means for food 
preservation will be the contingent upon the improvement of foo d sensory aspects resulting 
from lowering of water activity and refinement of techniques fo r controlling the water activity. 
Because lowering the water activity adversely affect the sensor y characteristics of the food.  
Water activity can be controlled by either removing water using  appropriate dehydration 
techniques or by adding appropria te amounts and types of salt o r sugar in the food and allowing 
the binding of water. Other than  the water activity and pH pres ervation is generally achieved 
using heat by large scale inactivation of viable microorganism.  A wide range of variables 
including the level of water act ivity within the product and th e pH of the product influenced 
the probability of the survival of  the target organism in a giv en food products.  
25 
  
Combination technology 
Combination technology preservation techniques is to establish a series of preservative factors 
or hurdles i.e. the preservative fa ctors that the microorganism  are unable to overcome. 
To prevent the spoilage instead of using a severe parameter of a single process, one can use 
different types of more than 2 - 3 processes together and there fore severity of the whole process 
can be reduced. This results in a better quality of the end pro duct. So, various hurdle like 
preservatives, packaging, ultra-high pressure, pH, water activi ty temperature and edible 
coatings all these in the combination can be used.  
 
26 
 Novel and emerging technologies  
The novel and emerging technologie s in the food processing incl ude: 
Non-thermal technology  like high pressure processing, i rradiation, membrane technolog ies, 
microwave drying, ozone treatment etc. 
Packaging  like active packaging, controlled atmosphere storage (CAS) and  modified 
atmosphere packaging (MAP), edibl e packaging or edible coating.  
Artificial intelligence  which include machine le arning and deep learning. 
Zero waste  technologies include supercriti cal fluid extractor or micro en capsulation. 
 
27 
  
Summary 
The food safety the important or major concern in fruits vegeta bles and plantation crops. The 
major quality loss reaction occurr ed due to the growth or prese nce of microorganism which 
will eventually lead to the severe consequences and various par ameters affect the microbial 
growth, which are classified int o 5 factors namely intensive, p rocessing, extensive, implicit 
and the net effect. All traditio nal preservation techniques suc h as control of water activity, pH 
temperature is based on all these such factor. These are used f or food preservation, they work 
on the basis of the principle of controlling these microbial or  their activity.  
The combination of the traditi onal techniques also known as hur dle technology is widely used 
to stop or kill the microorgani sm with minimal processing. A mi nimal processing strategy 
which gives a better  quality products.  
