Post-Harvest Operations a nd Processing of Fruits,  
Vegetables, Spices and Plantation Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
Lecture No: 26 
Juice Extraction and Clarification 
Hello everybody. Now we are enter ing into the sixth module of t he course. In this module 
that is the sixth week we will discuss various aspects of juice s and concentrates. So, in 
today's lecture we will study jui ce extraction and clarificatio n.  
 
The concepts and topics which we will cover in today's lecture include juices and their types, 
juice extraction technologies, how the juices are separated wha t are the various novel and 
emerging technologies for juice extraction and finally we will discuss about the clarification 
of the juice.  
 So let us understand what juice means. In the most general sens e, it is defined as the 
extractable fluid content of ce lls or tissues. According to Cod ex Alimentarius definition, 
unfermented palatable juice intend ed for direct consumption is the liquid obtained by 
mechanical processing of fresh, or suitably treated sound ripe fruits, preserved exclusively by 
physical means. 
And you know fruits and vegetables are rich sources of minerals , vitamins and antioxidants 
and therefore these juices become a very good source for supply  of these elements to the 
people. Therefore, these juices  are popular amongst all age gro ups for their refreshing 
character, sensational flavour  and rich nutritional profiles.  
 
The juices may be classified into various groups depending upon  t h e  d i s p e r s i o n  s y s t e m s  
composition. This category of the  juice is clear or clarified o r fully transparent juice. This 
includes a water solution of the  so-called soluble solids prese nt in the fruits or vegetables 
such as sugar, organic acid, sal t, free amino acids, water solu ble vitamins and pigment etc.  
Generally, particle size of these  clear or clarified transparen t juices is under 0.001 micron.  
 Second category is Opalescent or  translucent juices. Here, in a ddition to the soluble solids 
(clear juice), it also contains colloidal substances with a dis tribution spectrum of 0.1-0.001 
micron. This dispersed phase includes pectin, hemicelluloses, p roteins, protein-polyphenol 
complexes, and dissolved starch.  
 
Third category is a cloudy or tur bid juice. This is actually an  unclarified juice, i.e., pressed 
juice that is not subjected to clarification treatments.   Here , the particle diameter is less than 
2.5 micron (Most frequent diameter is 0.6 to 0.8 micron). To im prove cloud stability, coarse 
particles, which are generally unstable and prone to rapid sedi mentation, can be partly 
removed by centrifugation method etc. 
 
Another category or you can say last category of the fruit juic es may be pulp enriched juices. 
These types of juices contain a distinct amount of coarse cloud  particles that is sometimes 
even termed as pulp particles with a diameter of over 100 micro ns, which are mostly fruit 
flesh segments for example juice sacks of the citrus fruits end ocarp.   
This is the process flow chart for preparation of the juices. T he steps include the preparatory 
treatment like harvesting and st orage, raw material delivery sy stem, reception, washing 
conveying, stem elimination, sorting, peeling cutting or de-see ding and chopping. Thereafter, 
the prepared chopped fruits is subjected to next treatment whic h may be pulping, extraction 
of juice, centrifugation, ulrafilt ration and then these prepare d and clarified uses may be 
further subjected to shelf-life extension treatment like degass ing or pasteurization and finally 
blending, filling and packaging are done.  
So, in today's lecture we have al ready discussed about the prep aratory treatments and post 
extraction and post clarification treatments will be discussed later on. In this lecture we will 
mainly focus on the extraction a nd clarification of the juice.  
 
So let us switch to juice extraction. In this process the liqui d phase of the fruits or vegetables 
is expressed from solid particles. This involves the size reduc tion where, crushing, grinding, 
squeezer type extractors are used to comminute the fruits. Then  this is taken for separation 
process where, the fruit pieces are squeezed or juice is separa ted from the pulp or ground using various equipments like pr esser, rack and cloth press, hy draulic press, screw type press, 
belt press, hydro diffusion press or spiral filter press.  
And finally, these juices are sen t to some other processes of l ike centrifugation, membrane 
separation, enzyme-based clarifi cation and fining agent treatme nt to clarify the juices.  
 
So let us study little details of  all these processes. Crushing /milling improve distribution of 
fruit cells providing channels for transfer of liquid. An array  of machines has been applied to 
chop, crush, or mill fruits to appr opriate particle size. The p roblems associated with too finely 
milled pulp are Difficulties in filtration, increase in percent age of suspended solids in juice, 
higher amount of these solids can result in bitter/undesirable taste, presence of pectinases and 
other degrading enzymes. The Problems with pulp with large frui t pieces are juice yield is 
relatively low and amount of suspended solids is low. Methods f or size reduction of fruits 
include grinding, chopping or cut ting, heating and hammering or  miling. 
 
A crushing mill Consist of sharp knives/blades rooted on a rota ting shaft to cut the fruit into 
fine pieces. Crush the fruit in a few seconds and tilt periodic ally to discharge fine pulp into the feeding unit of the pressing machine. Crushing or grinding time is decided by the texture 
of the fruit and the required quality of the final juice produc ts. The rotational speed of the 
shaft, temperature, and moisture level are controlled through a n automatic control system.  
These types of machines are used to cut soft fruit of fairly la rge size such as apple, pear, 
pineapple, guava, and mango. 
 
The other type of mill is the  grinding mill you can see here in  the figure. Consist of the blades 
or hammers mounted on a spinner that rotate alongside a perfora ted screen.  The speed of the 
hammer and the pore size of the screen may vary with the nature  of the fruit and the quality 
of the intended juice product.  These types of crushing machine  avoid crushing of pits during 
maceration.  Finally, the fruit mash is conveyed to the pressin g unit which minimizes the 
residence time of fruit mash in a buffer tank. Used for fruits having fleshy parts, such as 
strawberries, blueberries , black currants, and grapes.  
    
 
     
 
Squeezer type extractor comprises an upper and a lower cup, str ainer tube, and cutter. The 
upper cup is lowered onto the lo wer cup building pressure   on the fruit.  A cutter comes up 
through the centre of the lower cup to cut a hole through the s kin in order to allow the inner 
parts to flow out.  The upper cup continues to squeeze down on the lower cup to extract as 
much juice as possible. Pulpy juice flows through the strainer tube into the juice manifold. 
Eventually, the downward pressure causes the peel to break up, disintegrate, and oil releases 
from the peel. This is a special and specific type of extractor  for extraction of                        
citrus fruit juices. 
 
 
Separation of juice  
Pressers belong to the frequently used class of juice separator s. Their efficiency depends on 
nature and porosity of pulp, viscosity of juice, and extent of pressure applied.  Pulp having 
sufficient porosity is spread evenly in a thin layer so that th e juicy liquid has to travel a short 
trajectory to the facade. Sometimes, the pulp is mixed with wat er which disperses the semi 
permeable membrane and facilitates the flow of juice while diss olving a large amount of 
solids. A diverse range of presses has been designed and applie d to express juice from pulp 
mash. 
 
    
 
  
 
 
Rack and cloth press 
It is one of the traditional ways  to extract juice from fruit p ulp. First, piling fruit mash inside 
hardwood/ stainless steel frames or beds entangled with loose c loth or nylon screens is done. 
Second, topping frame over frame until several layers are forme d and third, pre ssing of stacks 
to evacuate the fruit juices i s done. Drawback of the method is  that it is laborious and lacks 
automation. 
 
 
Hydraulic press 
Hydraulic presses are often used for pressing pulps of grapes, berries, and black currants. 
Pressure causes fruit cell vacuoles to burst liberating natural  bioactive, enzymes, and minerals. Figure shows a Mash from continuous milling unit ente rs at position 1 known as 
trituration. Pressure of about 6000 psi applied via an adjustab le piston. Sufficient water added 
to re-extract the juice retained in pomace. Resultant juice pas sed through a fine wire screen 
made of corrosion-free materials  or muslin bags. Then finally s torage is done.  
 
 
 
  
Screw presser 
Screw presses are the most common and traditional devices used for juice extraction.  They 
are cylindrical vessels with screw-type press mounted on perfor ated screening assembly. But 
recent designs are automated with several assemblies of screw p resser in continuous mode. 
Major drawbacks involve Fruit juices like apple and pear are mo re prone toward oxidation 
when in contact with metals suc h as iron (Fe). Continuous screw  presses require pressing aids 
(often cellulose up to 1% by weight) which may result in off-fl avor. The solutions for these 
issues include replacing metallic presses with nylon or wool ba sed press cloths which are 
lighter in weight, have greater  strength and useful life, and a re very easy to clean. 
  
 
Belt presser 
These presses offer juice yields about 90% and have become part  of juice-manufacturing 
units. Fruit pulp spread on nylon screens is pressed under coup le of rollers that express juice 
and pomace. The processes include  Spreading of fruit pulp conti nuously and evenly over 
bottom screen by automatic spreader, covering of screen by an u pper belt, Guiding of screen 
to the pressing unit driven by hea vy rollers where Juice flows out leaving pomace behind  and 
pressing of pomace at increased pressure by rollers of reduced diameter where traces of juice 
is extracted. 
     
 
Hydro-diffusion extractor 
Mechanical pressing systems suffer from drawbacks of low juice yield and reduced insoluble 
solids. Diffusion extractors are used for continuous counter cu rrent extraction of juice from 
apples, etc. Water-soluble fruit cell components are continuous ly transferred to aqueous 
solution through semipermeable cell membrane. Construction of d iffusion extractors: 
Typically, diffusion extractors are suitably inclined cylinders  equipped with helical screw 
conveyor, filtration screen, wate r inlet system, pulp pumping m achines, and temperature, 
moisture & pressure regulators.  The pros are high juice yield and higher amount of soluble 
solids (90-94%). Cons are juice is dilute due to extraction wat er, juice may be sour due to 
tannins extracted and more ener gy and labor needed in subsequen t drying steps. 
 
 Spiral filter press 
Here, the mash from mill/grater is sent to buffer tank, screw p ump transfers the mash to 
extraction cell, mash in extraction cell is lifted by a spiral screw conveyer and ascended 
continuously through the extractio n cell, rotating spiral cause s juice to pass through an 
external filter element and finally Juice is transferred to sto rage vessel by vacuum pumps. 
Such presses are useful for fruits such as apple, pear, pineapp le, kiwi fruit, banana, and 
watermelon. In this method, Hamminkeln (a German spiral filter machine) is used to extract 
juice from fine pulp. 
 
 
Application of novel technologies in juice extraction 
Mechanical pressing techniques for juice extraction may lead to  increase in temperature of 
juice. At increased temperatures, loss of nutrients & bioactive s due to thermal degradation is 
accelerated. Furthermore, the cell rupture in mechanical pressi ng is poor leading to low juice 
yield. To overcome low juice yield, hydro diffusion technique h a s  b e e n  u s e d  f o r  b e t t e r  
extraction. However, hydro diffusion leads to dilute juice and may result in                        
s o u r  t a s t e  d u e  t o  e x t r a c t e d  t a n n i ns. Therefore, techniques such  as the use of ultrasound, 
microwaves and pulsed electric fi eld may offer better extractio n alternatives. 
  
Novel extraction technologies 
Ultrasound assisted extracti on generate cavita tion bubbles in a  liquid matrix, which collapse 
simultaneously causing extensive mass transfer, mechanical stre ss, and thermal  effects as a 
result of bubble disintegration. L ow energy (100 kHz; Intensiti es < 1 W/cm2) are generally 
used in particle size reducti on and collapse between bubbles in  liquid foods. High Energy 
(20-500 kHz; Intensities > 1 W/cm 2) are used to initiate chemic al and physical changes in 
solid food by acoustic and hydrodynamic cavitations. 
 
Microwave assisted extraction 
Microwaves (MW) are electroma gnetic radiation in range of 100-3 000 MHz (2450 MHz in 
domestic & 915 MHz in industry). When subjected to MW, molecule s (either permanent or 
induced dipole) orient themselves in direction of electric fiel d. During relaxation, molecules 
get back to disordered configur ation while releasing thermal en ergy. In this technique, fruit or 
plant samples swiftly heat up fr om the interior and expand whic h finally rupture to cause heat 
and water to burst outward.  Mic rowave-assisted extraction is a n attractive technique for producing juices rich in bioact ives (polyphenols and anthocyani ns) and antioxida nt activity. It 
has been suggested as a green a lternative to mechanical pressin g and enzymatic maceration. 
 
 
Pulse electric field assisted extraction 
Pulsed electric field (PEF) has emerged as a leading nonthermal  technology in juice industry. 
PEF treatment leads to electropor ation of fruit cells facilitat ing the extraction of cellular 
bioactive. PEF treatment can inactivate microbes while retainin g natural color, flavor, texture 
and nutritional profile. Compared  to conventional thermally pro cessed fruit juices, PEF 
treatment prevents hydroxy methyl furfural formation during sto rage. PEF treatment can also 
inactivate pectin methyl esterase (PME) (which de-esterifies me thoxylated pectin into 
insoluble calcium pectate) t hus preserving viscosity and cloud stability of the juice. 
 
 
Clarification Extracted fruit juices are usually turbid, due to insoluble pla nt particles (fibers, cellulose, 
hemicellulose, protopectin, star ch, and lipids) and colloid mac romolecules (pectin, proteins, 
soluble-starch fractions, certain  polyphenols, and their oxidiz ed or condensed derivatives). 
Depending on the finished product, these substances must be par tially or entirely eliminated 
to avoid turbidity and precipitation during storage as well as to  im p ro ve sen so ry  at trib u tes  
(taste, flavor, and color). For this purpose, physical and enzy matic treatments have been 
applied to ensure clarity a nd homogeneity of fruit juices. 
 
Decanter-type centrifugation machine 
It can separate suspended solids from liquids and slurries. The  working principle is based on 
buoyancy effects, i.e., when juice  is rotated, components with larger density fall to the bottom 
of the liquid mixture. Liquid part (with solids of size less th an 1 μm), passes through screen 
and juice outlet.  Solids of large r size are pushed toward the opposite end with smaller 
conical diameters and are pressed there. Major drawbacks are hi gh energy consumption, high 
equipment costs, high maintenan ce costs and unable to separate cells and viruses. Advantages 
include clean environment (little or no strange odors), flexibl e designs for versatile fruit 
juices, high throughput efficiency and juice of even compositio n. 
  
Disc stack centrifugation machines 
Separation in the disc-stack centr ifuge takes place in the spac es created between a numbers of 
conical separation area. Most mo dels rotate at between 4000 and  10,000 rpm. The 
accumulated solids can be discharged, without stopping the cent rifuge, by rapidly opening an 
annular slot at the periphery of the rotating bowl.  The clarif ied juice leaves the centrifuge 
under pressure. Clarification by  centrifugation often leads to improved operation of the 
evaporator system by providing con sistent pulp levels in the ju ice.  
 
 
 
Filtration 
Conventional dead-end filtration is bag filters, rough screens,  multimedia filters, sediments or 
sand filter. It remove particle having diameter of 1 to 20 micr on. Membrane filtration is polymeric membranes and removes substances smaller than 0.1 μm.  Ultra‐filtration 
techniques are used, in which the juice feed flows transversely , under pressure, across a 
membrane support tube, to avoid ‘blinding’ of the filter surfac es. 
 
 
Enzymes 
Use of pectinases to reduce viscosity and enhance extraction yi eld is common in fruit juice 
industry. For example, endo polyga lacturonases reduce viscosity  of papaya juice by 17.6%. 
Pectinases are favorable for maceration of fruits that are rich  in pectin. High temperature may 
deteriorate nutrients and accelerate microbial contamination; t herefore, enzymes offering 
higher specific activities at low er temperatures are more pract ical. Enzymes traces are 
completely removed by washing to avoid odd constituents. One ca se study by Chauhan et al., 
2001 suggest that incubation of plum fruit with 5 mg/100 g pect inase at 37°C for 360 min 
increased juice yield to 92.4%. Mixture of pectin methylesteras e and polygalacturonase (0.05 
mg/100 g of each) at 50°C and 120 min produced 96.8% juice yiel d. Commercial pectinase 
s u c h  a s    P o l y ‐(1,4‐alpha‐D‐galacturonide) glycanohydrolase ar e extracted from the source 
Aspergillus sp., Rhizopus sp w hich operate at pH of  2.5-6.0 an d temperature of 30-60°C.  
Enzyme activities 
Enzymes such as Esterase (Polymethylgalact uronase esterase) ar e used to de-esterify pectin 
with the removal of methoxy groups to form pectic acid. Depolym erases (Polymethylgalactu-
ronases with either endo ‐ or exo‐ activity) are used to disrupt polymer chain into fragments, 
which involve endo activity - refers to those polygalacturonase s which act at random within 
the chain and exo activity - refers to those where the attack i s sequential along its length, 
starting at one end. Pectinlyases perform depolymerase activity ; operate at glycosidic 
linkages, either side of which carries an esterified or methoxy lated group. Amylases are used 
to break down any residual starch and overcome the problem. Cel lulases are used to facilitate 
the rapid removal of colour  during fruit processing. 
 
Fining agents 
Physical finings are certain fining agents, which have physical  or mechanical action, 
examples are kaolin, diatomaceous earth, Spanish clay, bentonit e or china clay and are known 
as filter aids. Generally 0.5 to  0.1 percent earth is mixed wit h fruit juice and then passed through the filter press.  Chemical finings such as gelatin  and casein are used to clarify  the 
fruit juices and act partly to n eutralize the electrical charge d particles and partly by forming 
insoluble precipitate with the constituents of the juice.  Gela tin combines with tannins and 
casein with acid of the juice. The gelatin may cause juice clou dy if used in excess.  
Depending on the tannin content of the fruit juice, gelatin sol ution is mixed and                        
allowed to stand for 18 to 24 h to ensure that the precipitated  matter clots                        
together and settles down.  The c larified juice is then siphone d off.  Albumin (egg white) can 
also be used in clarification of juices. 
 
 
Summary 
Size reduction operations such a s crushing, milling, grinding f acilitates the juice separation 
process. Primarily, all the fruit juice separating machines wor k by applying pressure on pulp. 
However, certain juice separati ng units are also based on centr ifugal force and diffusion. The 
selection of a suitable clarif ying methodology depends on the c omposition of raw juice and 
the quality and sensory characteristics of the final juice prod uct. Use of enzymes has shown 
potential use in juice clarific ation, however, it requires thor ough knowledge about enzymes 
as their traces in final product may form some odd constituents . The novel extraction 
techniques can reduce the use of  water and energy avoids the de trimental effects on 
nutritional, sensory, and antioxi dant attributes and provides f resh like quality with longer 
shelf life to product. 
  
 
   
These are the references for t his lecture. Thank you very much for your patience hearing. 
 