1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing Fruits, Vegetables, Spic es and Plantation Crop 
Products 
Professor H. N. Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture – 04 
Indian Spices  
This topics covered in the lectu r e  a r e  c l a s s i f i c a t i o n  o f  i n d i a n  spices, their composition, 
sensory attributes, antimicrobia l potential, ant ioxidants, bioa ctives, and health value along 
with some important features of n atural colours, flavouring com pounds, and lastly infestation 
and quality losses associated with spices. 
 
 
 2 
 Spices  
Definitions 
The Geneva based international st andards organization (ISO) def ines the spices as vegetable 
products or mixture thereof, which are free from extraneous mat ter, used for flavoring, 
seasoning and imparting aroma in foods. According to the Webste r, any of the various 
aromatic vegetable production as paper, cinnamon, nutmeg, mace,  allspice, ginger, cloves, 
etc., which are used in cookery to season and to flavor sauces,  pickles, etc. as a vegetable 
condiments or relish, usually in the form of a powder, or also as condiments collectively. 
Famous spice author Rosengarten has described the spice as a pr oduct which enhances or 
alters the quality of a thing, for example, altering the taste of a food to give it zest or 
pungency, a piquant or las ting flavoring or a relish.  
 
Production and exports stats of spices 
India is the world’s largest producer, consumer and exporter of  spices. The country produces 
about 75 of the 109 varieties listed by the ISO and it accounts  for half of the global trading in 
spices. In the year 2020, spices worth US dollar 3.62 billion w ere exported from India. Top 
importers of Indian spices in the financial year 21 were USA, U AE, UK, Hong Kong, 
Australia and Canada. The major countries, which imported large  cardamom from India 
include Afghanistan, Pakistan, United Arab Emirates, UK, USA an d Canada. The exported 
value of total spices was US do llar 1.68 billion from April to August 2021 and in the August 
2021 alone, it was to the tune of US dollar 312.57 million.  3 
 
 
This figure shows the production and export states of spices in  terms of quantity of spice 
produced (in tons) in the year 2019 in India. The cumin was the  h i g h e s t  i n  I n d i a  w i t h  2 ,  
99,000 tons production followed by turmeric and then ginger in 2019-20. The export value of 
spices from India (in million US dollar) has also shown a progr essive increase from 2016-17 
to 2020-21.  
 
India is known as the hub of spices. From the data of major ite m wise export of spice from 
India, in 2021 (value in the terms of crore rupees), it can be clearly observed that chilli 
contributed the highest (31%) fo llowed by cumin, mint products,  spice oils and oleorisins and 
small cardamom, ginger, curr y powder, pepper, and coriander. 4 
 
 
Herbs 
Herbs are plants valued for their medicinal and aromatic proper ties and are often grown and 
harvested for these unique prope rties. The main axis of the her b consists almost entirely of 
the stem, the root or other unde rground structures only being p resent. It includes part of the 
aerial shoot, usually the tops; th e whole aerial p art of the pl ant as Lobelia; o ccasionally whole 
plant including roots. The whol e undifferential plant body or t hallus of the lower plants of 
thallophyta.  
 
Difference between spicesand herbs 
Spices are generally dried parts of the aromatic plants used fo r seasoning and flavoring food, 
whereas the herbs are generally leaves are the aromatic plants which are used to impart flavor 
and odour to foods, with sometimes the addition of color. The l eaves are commonly traded 
separately from the plant stems and leave are leaf stalks. Spic es is often used in dried and 5 
 ground form. Herbs are generally used in fresh form. Spices is used for flavoring, coloring 
and preserving food items. Herbs are generally used for flavori ng or garnishing a food. 
Common examples of spices include cinnamon, cardamom, pepper, t urmeric, saffron, cumin 
and cloves. Sage, rosemary, thyme , parsley and basil are some o f the example of the herbs.  
So, these herbs and spices, as shown in this figure, these are the medicine cabinet in the 
kitchen. For example, oregano helps soothe stomach muscles. Gin ger has anti-nausea 
remedy. Garlic is a naturally known since ages, as antiseptic a gent. Fenugreek helps flush out 
harmful toxins. Cinnamon helps lower blood pressure. Black pepp er helps relieve indigestion. 
So, all these herbs and spices, they are the basket, that is th e medicine cabinet, they have very 
very important health value and health property.  
 
As far as the description of spi ces is concerned, they are desc ribed in terms of their taxonomy 
i.e. monocotyledoneae, dicotyledonac. They are also classified according to the nature of the 
spices like hot spice, mild spice, aromatic spice, herbs or aro matic vegetables. These are 
classified as the parts of the plants used as a spice like aril s, barks, buds, pistil, leaf, kernel, 
etc. The figure also shows the major chemical constituents of s pice essential oil. So, these 
spice essential oils can have various useful chemical compounds , like phenylpropadnoids, 
terpenes, flavonoids, coumarins,  anthocyans, aliphatic aldehyde s, esters, ketones, acids, and 
aromatic compounds. These compo unds of spices and herbs confer various health benefits. 
 6 
 
 
In details, classification of the spice based on the part of th e plant used are as: aril (e.g. mace 
of nutmeg), barks (e.g. cassia or cinnamon), berries (e.g. blac k pepper, chilli), buds (e.g. 
clove), pistil (e.g. saffron), kernel (e.g. nutmeg), leaf (e.g.  basil, mint, marjoram, sage, curry 
leaf), rhizome (e.g. ginger, tur meric), and seeds (e.g. ajowan,  aniseed, caraway, celery, 
coriander, dill, fennel). 
 
The all spices are also classified on the bases of their econom ic importance. Under this 
category, spices are grouped into two major categories i.e. maj or and minor spices. Major 
spices are those which contribute major share in the spice trad e industry of the world. These 
major spices, they include five spices like small cardamom, bla ck pepper, chili, turmeric and 
ginger.  7 
 These spices contribute about 75 to 90% of the total foreign ex change earned through the 
spices. So, there are five spices included in the category of m ajor spices of the India. 
Excluding these five all other spices, rests are coming under t he minor spices category. 
 
These minor spices are further grouped into five sub groups lik e seed spices (e.g. coriander, 
cumin seed, black cumin, fennel, aniseeds, celery, mustard, pop py, caraway), bulbous spices 
(e.g. garlic, onion, leek and shallot), aromatic spices (e.g. c love, cinnamon, allspice, aniseed 
and nutmeg), leafy spices (e.g. curry leaf, mint, rosemary, bay  leaf and parsley), and 
acidulent tree spices (e.g . tamarind, kokam, anardana). 
 
Botanically, spices are named according to genus and species. F or instance, for ginger, the 
genus name is Zingiber  and family name is officinale , thus ginger’s botanical name is 
Zingiber officinale . Each spice also belongs to a larger family of plants. In ging er’s case, the 
family is Zingiberaceae. Turmeric (Curcuma longa) and cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum) 8 
 are two other spices that belong to the family Zingiberaceae. I n the table, the botanical name 
including family, genus of certain or major spices that is grow n in the country, in the two 
groups i.e. monocotyledoneae or dicotyledoneae. 
 
Based on climate requirement, spices are grouped into three cat egories i.e. tropical, 
subtropical, and temperate spices. Tropical spices need high te mperature and abundant 
humidity. They are easily damaged by low temperature. The examp les of this group of spice 
include ginger, turmeric, black  pepper, cinnamon, kokam, galang al, small cardamom and 
clove.  
Sub tropical spices are those that  require relatively low tempe rature during their vegetative or 
early growth stages and high temperature in their reproductive stage. Examples of this 
category include cumin, fennel, coriander, fenugreek, onion and  garlic. Subtropical spices 
grown during summer are turmeric a nd ginger. Temperate spices c an withstand low 
temperature i.e. below 5 ᵒC and frosty weather but are damaged easily in hot weather. 
Examples of this category of s pices are thymes, saffron, carawa y, seed and savoy.  
 9 
 
 
Spices are also classified on th e basis of their origin and fla vour such as aromatic spices like 
cardamom, aniseeds, celery, cumin, etc., pungent spices like gi nger, chili, black pepper, 
mustard, phenolic spices like cl oves and allspice, and colored spices like turmeric, saffron 
and paprika. The spices are also classified based on their life  cycle, which include annual 
spices, biennial spices or perennial spices.  
Annual spices complete their life cycle in a single or one seas on. Example: coriander, cumin, 
fennel, fenugreek, celery, etc. Biennial spices complete their life cycle in two seasons (e.g. 
onions and parsley). Perennial spi ces complete their life cycle  in more than two seasons (e.g. 
black pepper, saffron, clove , nutmeg, and cinnamon).  
 
Generally, herbs are classified based on the botanical families , crop duration and growth 
habit. Under the category of bot anical family that is they are classified as apiaciae, lamiaceae. 
The examples of apiaceae include celery, fennel, parsley. Lamia ceae includes hoyssop, mint, 10 
 basil, marjoram, and liliaceae include leek, chive. Under the a nnual category, the crops 
include basil, coriander, dill; biennial herbs which leave two seasons and die after that such 
as caraway, leek, parsley; and perennial herbs live more than t wo seasons like sage, laurel, 
chive and mint. Classification based on the growth habit includ es herbs, shrubs and trees. 
Herbs include caraway, coriander, mint, oregano, marjoram, etc.  Shrubs include rosemary, 
sage, thyme. And trees include pime nta, curry leaf, laure, etc.   
 
Compounds responsible for flavor in herbal spices 
This table gives the various major compounds which contribute t o the flavor of the spices, 
herbs and spices or herbal spice.  For example, in all spices th e major flavoring compound is 
eugenol, and other compounds such as cineol, phellandrene or ca ryophyllene, etc. In basil, 
the major compound contributing to the flavor is D-linalool, an d minor compounds include 
methyl chavicol, eugenol, cineole, etc. Similarly, in the coria nder, D-linalool is the major 
compound. In marjoram carvacrol is the major compound and D-lin alool, eugenol, chavicol, 
methyl chavicol, D-terpineol are the minor compounds. In rosema ry, cineole is the major 
compound which contributes to its flavor. Borneol, linalool, eu calyptol, camphor, bornyl 
acetate, alpha pinene are the minor compound.  
So, researchers have analyzed that there are many compounds i.e . chemical compounds, 
organic compounds, aerobic compounds, which together constitute  or contribute collectively 
to the specific peculiar fla vor of that particular product.  11 
 
 
Nutritive value of herbal spices 
Most of the herbal spices are rich sources of protein, vitamin,  especially vitamin A, C and B, 
and minerals such as calcium, phosphorus, sodium, potassium and  iron. Parsley is the richest 
source of vitamin A, while coriander is one of the richest sour ces of vitamins C and A. 
Parsley and chervil are also rich sources of vitamin K. 
The table represents the nutriti v e  v a l u e  o f  h e r b a l  s p i c e s  i n  t e rms of approximate 
compositionper 100 g of edible portion. As shown in the table, oregano contains 11% protein 
that is equivalent to wheat, 10.3% fat, and 306 kcal per 100 gr am of the edible portion. 
Similarly, marjoram contains ar ound 13% protein, 7% fat. It pro vides 271 Calories per 100 
gram. Bay contains around 7.6% protein, 8.4% fat in addition to  t h e  v a r i o u s  m i c r o  a n d  
micronutrients and it provide s 313 kcal heat energy per 100 gra m. 
Although these spices have good nu tritional value including goo d sources of protein, fats, 
carbohydrate and energy value, but these spices they are not co nsumed as a source of 
nutrients, as a source of protein, fat or energy in the body.  The major reason behind that 
these spices contain various aromatic compounds, flavoring comp ounds, coloring compounds 
and majority of those compounds have pungent taste having a str ong flavor. They also 
possess aromatic and antibacterial properties. So, because of t his flavor they cannot be used 
as staple food. These spices therefore are not considered as a source of nutrients in our diet, 
rather they are used as a source of flavoring, coloring or boos ting antimicrobial properties, 
and improving the health value of the food.  12 
 
 
Similarly, many herbal spices are known as excellent sources of  natural antioxidants. 
Phenolic compounds are primarily antioxidants present in spices . There is a linear 
relationship between the total phenolic content and the antioxi dant properties of the spices. 
This table enlists the antioxidant isolated from herbal spices such as carnosic acid, carnosol, 
rosemarinic acid, and rosmanol contribute to the antioxidant po tential of rosemary. Similarly, 
in oregano, the antioxidant potential is contributed by the der ivatives of phenolic acids, 
flavonoids, and tocopherols. Also, in the table (on the right-h and side top) represents the 
relative antioxidant effectivene ss of the herbal spices. And it  was their antioxidant 
effectiveness, how effective they are as antioxidants. Oregano,  thyme, marjoram, sage, basil, 
fenugreek, fennel, coriander and pimento possess antioxidant pr operties better than that of the 
synthetic antioxidant, butyl ated hydroxyl toluene.  
 
These spices contain essential oils. So, using appropriate extr action method, these essential 
oils are extracted and are used a s  a n  a n t i m i c r o b i a l .  T h e y  a r e  h ighly inhibitory to selected 13 
 pathogenic and spoilage microor ganisms. The inhibition of the m icrobial growth due to 
spices essential oil is attributed  to the damage in membrane in tegrity which further affects the 
pH homeostasis and equilibrium of inorganic ions. The optical i somers of carvone from 
Mentha , Spicata  and Anethum  sowa  (Indian dill) were active against the wide spectrum of 
human pathogen fungi and bacteria . The table enlists the herbs and spices used along with 
their active ingredients. For example, in oregano, the compound  present is carvacrol, 
curcumin in turmeric, phenylpropanoides such as carvacrol, thym ol, and eugenol in clove. 
These are the major source of t he antimicrobial property of spi ces. 
 
This slide gives a comparison of different spices like asafoeti da, ginger, tulsi, clove, 
cinnamon and oregano with their effectiveness on the inhibition  o f  t h e  E. coli  at different 
concentrations. It can be clearly observed that the percentage inhibition increases with 
increasing the concentrations. As shown in figure, at 600 µg/ml  of turmeric, asafoetida, 
clove, tulsi and thyme lead to around 100% inhibition of the E. coli . 
 14 
 The table represents the antimic robial activity of herbal spice s. For example, fennel is an 
essential oil and is effective against Staphylococcus aureus , Bacillus subtilis  and the oregano 
and mint, are the essential oils  which are eff ective against Aspergillus ochraeus .  
 
The herbal spices have good insect repellent properties. Powder ed plant parts or extracts of 
seed or essential oils or active ingredients separated from the  essential oils and oleoresins of 
spices are used as insect repellents. The repellent action is n oticed against many storage pests 
of grains and pulses. Herbal spi ces can also be used as mosquit o repellent. The essential oil of 
basil and piperidine alkaloid se parated from long pepper repels  mosquito. This table shows 
insect repellent properties of spices, mode of application. For  example, fenugreek as seed 
extract is applied and repels the Tribolium castaneum .  
 
Then spices and herbs are used as colorants. The spices are the  natural sources of colors 
bringing the advantage as against  chemical or synthetic coloran ts. Spices tint in different 15 
 colors from yellow and orange t o different variations of red, g reen, etc. The coloring property 
of spices is due to the presence of various chemical compounds.  The principal compound 
responsible for the color include  beta-carotene, lutein, neoxan thin, chlorophyll, etc. in the 
leaves and herbs. The most common spices which are used as colo ring materials are paprika, 
red pepper, mustard, parsley, ginger, and turmeric. So, using s pices as colorants in the food is 
natural alternative to avoid t he use of conventional synthetic colorants.  
 
Depending upon the region, different  spices are used for flavor ing foods, bringing a 
distinguished flavor to each food style that even gives culinar y identity. For example in 
France, they use a specific type of flavor like savory marjoram , rosemary, and thyme etc. 
Similarly, in England, they use ginger, mustard seed. In Mexico , cinnamon, vanilla, and in 
Arabian Peninsula, they use black peppercorn, caraway seed, who le cumins. Flavor given by 
the spices are due to presence of certain families of chemicals  like phenylpropanoids, 
monoterpenes and other phenolic  compounds. Some important chemi cal compounds that are 
present in the spices which have good flavoring potential inclu de eugenol, apiol, sufranol, 
vanillin, peperine.  16 
 
 
During storage, spices and spice products are attacked by beetl e and moth pests, which the 
spice beetle, Stegobium paniceum  L. and the cigarette beetle, Lasioderma serricorne  F. are 
predominant. So, in dry products when the insect infestation is  high, there will be heating and 
moisture condensation, which is conducive for the spoilage by m icroorganisms. So, insect 
pests of stored spices and spice products are provided in this table. For example, Lasioderma 
serricorne  is the common pest in coria nder and its products, turmeric, gi nger, etc. 
 
The insect infestation is one of the major problem in the spice s. So, the fumigation, 
irradiation or heat treatments can be generally used for preven ting the infestation. 17 
 
 
Fumigation involves the applicat ion of various chemicals in the  gaseous phases that act 
against pest organisms. Current ly, spices or spice products are  disinfected with phosphine or 
methyl bromide fumigants. Methyl bromide is recommended for fum igating spice and spice 
mixes, generally, at 24 to 48 gram per cubic meter with an expo sure period of 24 to 48 hour 
under normal atmospheric conditions.  
The gas is relatively less effective than ethylene oxide agains t microbes. It is particularly 
suitable for vacuum fumigation of processed and packaged produc ts including spice powders. 
Recently, however the compound has been identified to cause ser ious ozone depletion with 
an ozone depleting potential of about 0.7. So, repeated treatme nt of spice products with 
fumigant causes discoloration a nd loss of some essential oils. 
 
Ethylene oxide is suspected car cinogen and it forms chlorohydri n or bromohydrin residues, 
which are also carcinogenic. Hence, the use of ethylene oxide h as been discontinued in many 18 
 developed countries. Fumigation of cloves by ethylene oxide at doses recommended in 
various regulatory agencies i.e. 550, 750, 1000 gram per cubic meter for 6 hours at 25 ᵒC. It 
was found that the volatile oil content was decreased by 1.7 to  2.2%. So, the drawbacks of the 
fumigants currently used for di sinfestation and disinfection of  stored spice include residue 
problems, insect resistance a nd adverse effect on the environme nt.  
 
Gamma-irradiation of whole and ground spices are effective agai nst insect infestation at 1 
kGy. Spices such as coriander, cum in, turmeric, and chilies are  treated by gamma radiation 
by 10 kGy and stored for 6 months are proved to retain good mic robiological quality. In 
general, there is no adverse effect has been observed in spices  irradiated at the recommended 
dosage of 10 kGy. The appearance  and sensory qualities of irrad iated spices and spice 
products remain unaffected. About  30 countries including India have approved irradiation of 
spices and about 20 countries are  already irradiating spices on  a commercial scale.  
 19 
 The table shows the selected cases where irradiation has influe nced the quality of the spices 
and spices products with the commodity, their dosage level and the parameters with the 
effect. For example in the case of turmeric, garlic powder, the  required dose level is 10 and 
30 kGy which alters the pH.  
 
Heat treatment is another insect infestation has been considere d since long time. Spices such 
as black pepper, fennel, coriander, anise, turmeric, they are h eat treated at 70 ᵒC for about 15 
min and did not affect the quality and microbial load was reduc ed partly. Sterilization of 
spices with pulsed steam, in which actually the steam condenses  on the spice particles help to 
eliminate microorganism with minimum adverse effect on flavor o r aroma. Pasteurization of 
spice could be done by high frequency and microwave treatments as an alternative to 
irradiation and fumigation. Ther mal regulating methods generall y causes one or the other 
undesirable changes in the treated products. Hence, the heat tr eatment can be supplemented 
or combined with other control measures.  
 20 
 Summary 
Herbs and spices have medicinal and aromatic properties which c an be used for flavoring and 
health boosting effects. Spices a re classified based on the pla nt used parts, economic 
importance, taxonomy, climate requirement, origin and flavor an d life cycle, whereas the 
herbs are classified based on botanical families, growth habit and crop duration. There are 
various compounds like eugenol, D-linalool, cineole, carvone, a piole, etc., which are 
responsible for flavor in the herbs and spices. Most of the her bal spices are rich sources of 
micro and macronutrients, antioxi dants and have antimicrobial p roperties. They can be used 
as colorant and flavoring agents . During storage, the spices ca n be infested by insects; 
fumigation, irradiation and heat tre atment are the methods to c ontrol them.  
 
These are the references  for further study. Thank you. 