Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities | USDA
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
A locked padlock
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Menu
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Main navigation
Home
Topics
Topics
Animals
Biotechnology
Broadband
Conservation
Coronavirus
Data
Disaster Resource Center
Farming
Food and Nutrition
Forestry
Health and Safety
Invasive Species
Opioids
Organic
Plants
Recreation
Research and Science
Rural
Trade
Urban Agriculture
Our Agency
Our Agency
About USDA
Agencies
Careers
Employee Services
Farm Bill
Future of Work
Initiatives
Staff Offices
Priorities
Priorities
Equity at USDA
Climate Solutions
Food and Nutrition Security
More, New, and Better Market Opportunities
Media
Media
Agency News Releases
Agency Reports
Blog
Digital
Press Releases
Radio
Search usda.gov
Search
Utility navigation
Glossary
AskUSDA
Recalls
Contact Us
Secondary Navigation
Equity at USDA
Climate Solutions
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Project Summaries
FAQs
Climate Change Adaptation and USDA
Food and Nutrition Security
More, New, and Better Market Opportunities
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities
USDA is committed to supporting a diverse range of farmers, ranchers, and private forest landowners through Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities. This effort will expand markets for America’s climate-smart commodities, leverage the greenhouse gas benefits of climate-smart commodity production, and provide direct, meaningful benefits to production agriculture, including for small and underserved producers.
USDA is investing more than $3.1 billion for 141 projects through this effort and all the projects require meaningful involvement of small and underserved producers.
Partnerships for Climate Smart Commodities Finalized Agreements
To learn more about active Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities projects, please view the project dashboard link below.
Project Dashboard
Questions about Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities should be sent to
climate-smart-commodities@usda.gov
. Find answers to many frequently asked questions on our
FAQs page
.
Background
USDA first announced details of the Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities opportunity in
February 2022
. The design of this opportunity was informed by over 400 comments received in the
Request for Information
published in September 2021. Through this new opportunity, USDA will finance partnerships to support the production and marketing of climate-smart commodities via a set of pilot projects lasting one to five years.
On September 14, 2022, Secretary Vilsack announced USDA would be investing up to $2.8 billion in 70 selected projects under the first pool of the Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities funding opportunity. On December 12, 2022, he announced $325 million would be invested in an additional 71 projects under the second funding pool.
USDA is updating the
project dashboard
periodically as we finalize the scope and funding levels of grant agreements. These projects will:
Provide technical and financial assistance to producers to implement climate-smart production practices on a voluntary basis on working lands;
Pilot innovative and cost-effective methods for quantification, monitoring, reporting and verification of greenhouse gas benefits; and
Develop markets and promote the resulting climate-smart commodities.
USDA anticipates that these projects will result in:
Hundreds of expanded markets and revenue streams
for farmers and ranchers and commodities across agriculture and forestry ranging from traditional corn to specialty crops.
More than 60,000 farms reached, encompassing more than 25 million acres of working land
engaged in climate-smart production practices, like cover crops, no-till and nutrient management, as well as pasture and forestry management.
More than 60 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent sequestered over the lives of the projects.
This is equivalent to removing more than 12 million gasoline-powered passenger vehicles from the road for one year.
Involvement of
nearly 100 universities, including over 30 minority serving institutions.
This will bring new ideas and innovative skills in monitoring and outreach. This includes:
11 projects with a Historically Black College or University (HBCU)
as the lead and more than 35 projects with HBCUs as major partners; and
Six projects with a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI)
as the lead and nearly 20 projects with HSIs as major partners.
Over 20 tribes and tribal groups
leading and partnering on many projects and representing tribes across a wide geography.
Proposals for the 141 selected projects include plans to
match on average 50% of the federal investment with non-federal funds.
This infographic
(PDF, 1.3 MB) includes additional metrics on projects from Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities.
Dashboard of Finalized Projects
Project Dashboard
Tentatively-Selected Project Summaries
Visit
usda.gov/climate-solutions/climate-smart-commodities/projects
for details on individual Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities projects grouped by approximate funding ceiling and location.
Partner Resources
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Agreement Administration Training
(link is external)
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Grantee Training
(link is external)
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Memo to the Field – NRCS
(PDF, 264 KB)
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Memo to the Field – FSA
(PDF, 386 KB)
NRCS Environmental Evaluation CPA-52 Worksheet Instructional Video
(link is external)
NRCS Environmental Evaluation CPA-52 Worksheet, Tools and Training Website
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Data Dictionary
(PDF, 1.7 MB)
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Project Reporting Workbook
(XLSX, 6.9 MB)
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Supplemental Reporting Workbook
(XLSX, 1.0 MB)
Timeline
Eligible Entities
The Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities funding opportunity is currently closed. A wide range of public and private entities were eligible to apply, including:
County, city or township governments.
Special district governments.
State governments.
Small businesses.
For-profit organizations other than small businesses.
Federally recognized Native American Tribal governments.
Native American Tribal organizations other than Federally recognized Tribal governments.
Nonprofits that have a 501(c)(3).
Nonprofits that do not have a 501(c)(3).
Private institutions of higher education.
Public and State-controlled institutions of higher education.
Please note that agricultural producers and forest landowners may receive incentives through awarded projects via partner groups.
While grant agreements under this funding opportunity will be made with a single entity, USDA encouraged multiple partners to coordinate on project proposals.
In response to questions received from potential applicants, USDA provided additional clarity regarding requirements in the funding opportunity, including:
The definition of “domestic applicant”;
Producers’ eligibility as beneficiaries of the funding; and
Quantification requirements.
Frequently asked questions
are available to help answer questions.
Pilot Projects and Climate-Smart Production Practices
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities pilot projects must focus on the on-farm, on-ranch, or forest production of climate-smart commodities and associated reductions of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and/or carbon sequestration.
Highly competitive projects will include agricultural and forestry practices or combinations of practices, and/or practice enhancements that provide GHG benefits and/or carbon sequestration, including but not limited to:
For the purposes of this funding opportunity, a
climate-smart commodity
is defined as an agricultural commodity that is produced using farming, ranching or forestry practices that reduce greenhouse gas emissions or sequester carbon.
Cover crops
Low-till or no-till
Nutrient management
Enhanced efficiency fertilizers
Manure management
Feed management to reduce enteric emissions
Buffers, wetland and grassland management, and tree planting on working lands
Agroforestry and afforestation on working lands
Afforestation/reforestation and sustainable forest management
Planting for high carbon sequestration rate
Maintaining and improving forest soil quality
Increase on-site carbon storage through forest stand management
Alternate wetting and drying on rice fields
Climate-smart pasture practices, such as prescribed grazing or legume interseeding
Soil amendments, like biochar
Funding Pools and Proposal Deadlines
Funding for Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities was provided in two funding pools. On March 11, USDA
extended the deadlines to apply
after requests from many stakeholders. USDA is committed to equity in delivery and will ensure that all projects in both funding pools benefit small and/or underserved producers. Projects were also encouraged to include early adopters.
First Funding Pool – CLOSED May 6, 2022
Proposals from
$5 million to $100 million
are in the first funding pool and should include large-scale pilot projects that emphasize the greenhouse gas benefits of climate-smart commodity production and include direct, meaningful benefits to a representative cross-section of production agriculture, including small and/or underserved producers.
Second Funding Pool – CLOSED June 10, 2022
Proposals from
$250,000 to $4,999,999
are in the second funding pool and are limited to particularly innovative pilot projects. These projects should place an emphasis on:
Enrollment of small and/or underserved producers, and/or
Monitoring, reporting and verification activities developed at minority-serving institutions.
Application Process and Evaluation Criteria
Applicants must have submitted project proposals on Grants.gov by the appropriate funding pool deadline, as outlined under Funding Pools and Proposal Deadlines. Potential applicants were directed to the
Grants.gov Organization Registration webpage
for a complete set of instructions and initial steps.
Project proposals for the Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities program included plans to:
Pilot implementation of climate-smart agriculture and/or forestry practices on a large-scale, including meaningful involvement of small or historically underserved producers;
Quantify, monitor, report, and verify climate results; and
Develop markets and promote climate-smart commodities generated as a result of project activities.
Greenhouse gas and/or carbon sequestration benefits and equity are key among project evaluation criteria. Projects must center around benefits to producers, and the meaningful inclusion of small and underserved producers is included in evaluation. Incentives to encourage producer participation are critical to project success. The
Notice of Funding Opportunity
includes a complete set of project proposal requirements, evaluation criteria, and submission guidelines.
Programmatic Environmental Assessment and Finding of No Significant Impact
Access the
final Programmatic Environmental Assessment (PEA)
(PDF, 5 MB) and the
Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI)
(PDF, 255 KB).
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Learning Network
The Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Learning Network (Partnerships Network) synthesizes lessons-learned from Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities projects.
See below for Partnerships Network meeting summaries.
Partnerships Network Discussion Virtual Meeting Summary
(PDF, 216 KB) (April 27, 2023)
Partnerships Network First Pool 1 Meeting Summary
(PDF, 248 KB) (June 14, 2023)
Partnerships Network First Pool 2 Meeting Summary
(PDF, 237 KB) (September 20, 2023)
Partnerships Network Pool 1 and Pool 2 Meeting Summary
(PDF, 238 KB) (November 8-9, 2023)
Project Coordination and Inquiries
Project Coordination
USDA hosted several “meet and greet” webinars in March and April 2022 to help support and encourage partnerships for proposal development.
Below is the participant registration information for each of those sessions (names and email addresses). USDA does not endorse any particular participant.
Producer Connections including Small/Historically Underserved Producers
(PDF, 109 KB)
– April 11, 2022
If you have producer connections you want to share, have ideas for engaging small and/or historically underserved producers, or if you are seeking partners with those connections/ideas for your proposal.
Measurement, Monitoring, Reporting and Verification and Climate-Smart Commodity Marketing
(PDF, 116 KB)
– April 11, 2022
If you have expertise in measurement, monitoring, reporting and/or verification, or climate-smart commodity marketing, or you are seeking that expertise for your proposal.
Producer Connections
(PDF, 168 KB) – March 29, 2022
If you have producer connections you want to share or are seeking producer connections for your proposal.
Measurement, Monitoring, Reporting and Verification
(PDF, 167 KB) – March 29, 2022
If you have expertise in measurement, monitoring, reporting and/or verification or are seeking that expertise for your proposal.
Climate-Smart Commodity Marketing
(PDF, 151 KB) – March 31, 2022
If you have expertise in climate-smart commodity marketing or are seeking that expertise for your proposal.
Engaging Small/Historically Underserved Producers
(PDF, 160 KB) – March 31, 2022
If you have ideas for engaging small and/or historically underserved producers in a proposal or are seeking new ideas or partners with expertise in working with small and/or historically underserved producers.
Inquiries
Please contact
Climate-Smart-Commodities@usda.gov
with any general questions on Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities. Find answers to many frequently asked questions on our
FAQs page
.
Additional Resources
1-Year Anniversary of Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities
(link is external)
Frequently Asked Questions
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities by the Numbers Infographic
(PDF, 1.3 MB)
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Producer Benefits Infographic
(PDF, 1.3 MB)
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Highlighted Projects Interactive Map
(link is external)
Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Stakeholder Toolkit
(PDF, 488 KB)
Videos and Webinars:
Watch the Projects and Partnerships Network Launch Event (April 27, 2023)
(link is external)
Watch Secretary Vilsack’s December 12, 2022 Remarks on Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities
(link is external)
Watch Secretary Vilsack’s September 14, 2022 Remarks on Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities
(link is external)
Climate Solutions from USDA Video
(link is external)
Secretary Vilsack Highlights Biden-Harris Administration Work to Combat Climate Change (February 7, 2022)
(link is external)
Second Funding Pool Tribal Outreach (May 25, 2022)
Webinar recording video
(link is external)
Presentation slides
(PDF, 1.3 MB)
Several “Meet & Greet” webinars were held in March and April 2022 to help support and encourage partnerships for proposal development. Meet & Greet participant registration information (names and email addresses) is available in the
Project Coordination and Inquiries
section.
Second Funding Pool Outreach (Mar. 3, 2022)
Webinar recording video
(link is external)
Presentation slides
(PDF, 1.3 MB)
Details of the Funding Opportunity (Feb. 16, 2022)
Webinar recording video
(link is external)
Presentation slides
(PDF, 1.5 MB)
Fact Sheet
(PDF, 1.0 MB)
News Releases:
Biden-Harris Administration Announces an Additional $325 Million in Pilot Projects through Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities, for Total Investment of $3.1 Billion
(December 12, 2022)
Vilsack Highlights USDA’s Climate Initiatives and Investments at COP27
(November 12, 2022)
Biden-Harris Administration Announces Historic Investment in Partnerships for 70 Climate-Smart Commodities and Rural Projects
(September 14, 2022)
Deadline for USDA’s Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Second Funding Pool is June 10
(May 26, 2022)
First Round of Proposals for Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Shows Strong Interest
(May 10, 2022)
USDA Climate-Smart Commodities Funding Opportunity Deadlines Approaching
(April 28, 2022)
USDA to Extend Application Deadlines for Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities Funding Opportunity
(March 10, 2022)
News Release: USDA to Invest $1 Billion in Climate Smart Commodities, Expanding Markets, Strengthening Rural America
(February 7, 2022)
USDA Climate Solutions
Return to top
Main navigation - Footer
Home
Topics
Our Agency
Priorities
Media
Footer navigation
AskUSDA
Pandemic Assistance
Contact Us
Site Map
Policies and Links
Our Performance
Careers
Report Fraud on USDA Contracts
Inspector General
Plain Language Writing in USDA
Open
FOIA
Accessibility Statement
Privacy Policy
Non-Discrimination Statement
Anti-Harassment Policy
Information Quality
USA.gov
WhiteHouse.gov
eGov
Feedback
No FEAR Act Data
Office of Special Counsel
Whistleblower Protection Coordinator
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Agency Financial Reports
USDA CARES Partner Portal
Sign Up for Updates
Subscribe
(link is external)
U.S. Department of Agriculture
USDA on Twitter
(link is external)
USDA on Facebook
(link is external)
USDA on LinkedIn
(link is external)
USDA Constant Contact
(link is external)
USDA on Instagram
(link is external)
USDA on Flickr
(link is external)
USDA on Youtube
(link is external)
USDA RSS