Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
We only use cookies that are necessary for this site to function to provide you with the best experience. The controller of this site may choose to place supplementary cookies to support additional functionality such as support analytics, and has an obligation to disclose these cookies. Learn more in our
Cookie Statement
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Farmers.gov sent this bulletin at 02/16/2024 09:17 AM EST
Trouble viewing this email?
View it as a webpage
.
The newsletter
is brought to you by the
USDA Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
In honor of Black History Month, we discussed the meaning and hope inherent in the observance with Black Seeds Farm, a registered USDA People’s Garden and urban farm. Learn about what celebrating Black history means to them
here
.
Opportunities
OUAIP’s
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Grant
program is now accepting proposals that support communities in growing or expanding access to fresh, local food.
Application deadline: April 9, 2024.
RMA’s Micro Farm Program
provides a risk management safety net for all commodities on a farm under one insurance policy. This insurance plan is tailored for any farm with up to $350,000 in approved revenue.
Sales closing
date vary by county, beginning Feb. 28, 2024
.
USDA Forest Service’s
Urban & Community Forestry 2024 Challenge Cost Share Grant Program
.
Application deadline: Feb. 29, 2024.
EPA’s
Climate Pollution Reduction Grants
include a general competition and tribes and territories competition.
General deadline: April 1, 2024. Tribes and Territories deadline: May 1, 2024.
NIFA’s
Beginning Farmer and Rancher Development Program
supports education, mentoring, and technical assistance initiatives for beginning farmers and ranchers.
Application deadline: April 4, 2024.
EPA’s Community Change Grants Program
announced $2 billion in Inflation Reduction Act funds for environmental and climate justice activities.
Technical assistance
for grant preparation is available. Applications will be accepted on a rolling basis.
The final application deadline is Nov. 21, 2024.
NRCS Organic Transition Initiative
assists producers with conservation practices and education and training related to organic certification.
Visit your local USDA Service Center
to apply.
Deadlines vary by state.
Rural Development’s
Rural Energy for America Program, Renewable Energy Systems, and Energy Efficiency Improvement Guaranteed Loans & Grants
fund renewable energy systems or help make energy efficiency improvements for agricultural producers and rural small businesses.
Multiple deadlines.
Federal Funding Tip
: Applicants for federal grant and cooperative agreement opportunities may require an active
Sam.gov
and
Grants.gov
registration to apply. Register in these systems
now
so you are ready when the opportunities are open.
Federal Advisory Committee
On Jan. 31, the Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Advisory Committee welcomed four new members and elected Kaben Smallwood, President/CEO of Symbiotic Aquaponic and Qiana Mickie, Executive Director of the NYC Mayor’s Office of Urban Agriculture, as Chair and Co-Chair of the Committee.
Learn more
about the member bios, meeting minutes and opportunity for public engagement.
USDA Highlights
Save the date!
The first National Urban Agriculture Conference is Aug. 4-6, 2024, at the Huntington Convention Center in Detroit, MI. Join stakeholders from across the country for training, engagement, and education. We want to hear from you -- please let us know what topics and resources interest you by emailing
OUAIP@usda.gov
with subject: “Urban Ag Conference”.
OUAIP recently attended
Compost 2024
hosted by the U.S. Composting Council. It was a great opportunity to connect with partners around composting and organic recycling. In 2023, OUAIP invested approximately $11.5 million in
Composting and Food Waste Reduction
(CFWR) projects in 23 States. Learn more about the
CFWR program
and
USDA’s efforts to support Food Loss and Waste
, including the
draft National Strategy for Reducing Food Loss and Waste and Recycling Organics
.
USDA launches new
Working Lands Climate Corps
to train future conservation and climate leaders on climate-smart agriculture.
2022 Census of Agriculture
data is now available.
People’s Garden Initiative
Join the Tri-Faith Initiative, USDA and partners for
The Summit to Counter Antisemitism, Islamophobia, and Related Forms of Hatred and Bias in Rural America
from May 15-16, 2024, at Tri-Faith Commons in Omaha, NE.
Registration Deadline: March 1, 2024.
Interested in connecting with gardens across the country? Register for the People’s Garden today and join the network of over 1,600 gardens from across the country. In joining, your garden will be highlighted on the
People’s Garden
website, sent a sign to display, and provided access to networking calls and a platform to share resources with other gardens.
Xerces Society Conservation Spotlight
This month’s special feature is Xerces Society’s
Bee City USA
and
Bee Campus USA
. The affiliate network includes over 375 cities and colleges across 46 states. Each affiliate commits to improving pollinator habitat, reducing pesticides, and conducting pollinator conservation outreach. In return, Xerces provides continuing education, seasonal “promo kits” to help with outreach, free consulting with staff,
and more
. Read about the network’s inspiring work on the
Bee City Blog
and follow Bee City and Bee Campus on
Facebook
and
Instagram
. To connect, check out
the affiliate map
and stay tuned for updates in future newsletters. Let the cross-pollination with People’s Gardens begin!
In Case You Missed It
The Council of Development Finance Agencies’ (CDFA)
Agriculture Finance Center
includes webinars, trainings, and frequent updates on local, state, regional, and national funding opportunities. CDFA and the National Association of State Departments of Agriculture Foundation partnered to create the “
Socially Disadvantaged Farmers & Ranchers Access to Capital Program”
with funding from USDA’s Office of Partnerships and Public Engagement 2501 Grant Program.
Attend the online
Best Practices for Pollinators Summit
, Feb. 27-29, 2024, co-hosted by the
Pollinator Friendly Alliance
and
The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation
. Learn ecologically sound land practices that promote pollinators, climate resilience, clean waters, and lands.
What We’re Reading
Reducing Recidivism through Arboriculture Workforce Development
, U.S. Forest Service
Urban agriculture beats conventional agriculture on climate — if it’s done right
, The Hill
On-Farm Composting & Compost Use Resources
, Institute for Local Self-Reliance
Space controlled environment agriculture offers pathways to improve the sustainability of controlled environmental agriculture on Earth
, Nature Food
Sign up for E-mail updates on Urban Agriculture
CONTACT US:
Farm Service Agency
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Risk Management Agency
Service Center Locator
SUBSCRIBER SERVICES:
Manage Subscriptions
|
Help
Subscribe to updates from Farmers.gov
Email Address
e.g. name@example.com
Share Bulletin
Powered by
Privacy Policy
|
Cookie Statement
|
Help