Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
We only use cookies that are necessary for this site to function to provide you with the best experience. The controller of this site may choose to place supplementary cookies to support additional functionality such as support analytics, and has an obligation to disclose these cookies. Learn more in our
Cookie Statement
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Farmers.gov sent this bulletin at 01/23/2024 12:46 PM EST
Trouble viewing this email?
View it as a webpage
.
The newsletter
is brought to you by the
USDA Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
Opportunities
Food Safety Certification for Specialty Crops Program
assists producers who incurred on-farm food safety program expenses related to obtaining or renewing a food safety certification in calendar years 2023.
Application deadline: Jan. 31, 2024.
Risk Management Agency’s (RMA) Whole-Farm Revenue Protection
provides a risk management safety net for all commodities on the farm under one policy.
Sales closing date vary by county, beginning Jan.
31, 2024.
RMA’s Micro Farm Program
provides a risk management safety net for all commodities on a farm under one insurance policy. This insurance plan is tailored for any farm with up to $350,000 in approved revenue.
Sales closing
date vary by county, beginning Feb. 28, 2024
.
USDA Forest Service
Urban & Community Forestry 2024 Challenge Cost Share Grant Program
.
Application deadline: Feb. 29, 2024.
EPA’s
Climate Pollution Reduction Grants
includes both a
general competition
and
Tribes and territories competition
.
General deadline: April 1, 2024. Tribes and Territories deadline: May 1, 2024.
EPA’s Community Change Grants Program
announced $2 billion in Inflation Reduction Act funds for environmental and climate justice activities.
Technical assistance
for grant preparation is available. Applications will be accepted on a rolling basis with initial award selections beginning in March 2024.
The final application deadline is Nov. 21, 2024.
NRCS Organic Transition Initiative
assists producers with conservation practices and education and training related to organic certification.
Visit your local USDA Service Center
to apply.
Deadlines vary by state.
Rural Development’s
Rural Energy for America Program, Renewable Energy Systems, and Energy Efficiency Improvement Guaranteed Loans & Grants
fund renewable energy systems or help make energy efficiency improvements for agricultural producers and rural small businesses.
Multiple deadlines.
Federal Funding Tip
: Applicants for federal grant and cooperative agreement opportunities may require an active
Sam.gov
and
Grants.gov
registration to apply. Register in these systems
now
so you are ready when the opportunities are open.
Federal Advisory Committee
Congratulations to the
newest members
of the Federal Advisory Committee for Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production:
Ted Fang, Executive Director, Florence Fang Community Farm, San Francisco, CA.
Qiana Mickie, Executive Director, NYC Mayor’s Office of Urban Agriculture, New York, NY.
Jeffrey Young, Director of Urban Extension, University of Kentucky, Shepherdsville, KY.
Kate Greenberg, Commissioner of Agriculture, Colorado Department of Agriculture, Denver, CO.
NRCS Chief Terry Cosby welcomes the new members and is “excited to learn from their fresh perspectives and to keep the momentum going” in 2024.
The next public meeting of the Advisory Committee will be
Jan. 31, 2 PM – 3 PM EST
. The public may attend via Zoom with
advance registration
. The final agenda will be posted on the
Federal Advisory Committee
website and comments will be accepted via
Federal Register Notice
. Email
UrbanAgricultureFederalAdvisoryCommittee@usda.gov
with any questions.
USDA Highlights
In January, OUAIP participated in the panel discussion
Urban Agriculture: Federal, State and Local Policy Initiatives
hosted by
Hunter College NYC Food Policy Center
. Participants discussed urban agriculture policy, shared ways they support urban and innovative agriculture, and discussed future collaborations.
The new
USDA Local and Regional Food Systems Resource Guide
from the Agricultural Marketing Service provides a comprehensive view of USDA programs that support local and regional food systems.
USDA’s 100
th
annual
Agricultural Outlook Forum
will be held in Arlington, VA,
15-16, 2024.
Register for virtual or in-person attendance
. We encourage you to attend the session “Building Collaborative Urban-Rural Networks for Market Access” scheduled for
Feb. 16, 10 AM -11:30 AM EST
and stop by the OUAIP booth to chat.
People’s Garden Initiative
Though it was cold and snowy in Washington, D.C., garden managers and volunteers worked in the USDA Headquarters People’s Garden to plant garlic and crocuses. These hardy bulbs will remain dormant through winter and sprout in early spring bringing yummy garlic-scapes and beautiful blooms.
Xerces Society Conservation Spotlight
The People’s Garden is partnering with
The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation
to expand pollinator and beneficial insect outreach and education to gardens nationwide. High school students and faculty of Philadelphia’s
U School
de-paved a parking lot to expand their food garden and to plant native plants for pollinators. Read more about this project on the
Xerces Blog
.
If you are interested in planting habitat this year, now is a great time to start planning. Check out Xerces’
Organic Site Prep Guide
for methods that might work for you.
In Case You Missed It
Best Practices for the Sustainable Urban Farm
EPA Launches New Composting Webpages and Community Composting Videos
Xerces Society Webinars:
In the Life of Beetles: Superstars of Soil Health, Pollinations, and More! (
Register
); Jan. 25, 2024; 1:00 - 2:00 PM EST.
In the Life of Threatened Fireflies with Richard Joyce (
Register
); Feb. 15, 2024; 1 PM – 2 PM EST.
Compost 2024
, the annual meeting organized by the U.S. Composting Council; Feb. 6-9, 2024, Daytona Beach, FL.
What We’re Reading
Scale up urban agriculture to leverage transformative food systems change, advance social–ecological resilience and improve sustainability
Why Dallas Sees a Future in Urban Farming
Delaware farmers’ markets hit all-time record in 2023
Sign up for E-mail updates on Urban Agriculture
CONTACT US:
Farm Service Agency
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Risk Management Agency
Service Center Locator
SUBSCRIBER SERVICES:
Manage Subscriptions
|
Help
Subscribe to updates from Farmers.gov
Email Address
e.g. name@example.com
Share Bulletin
Powered by
Privacy Policy
|
Cookie Statement
|
Help