Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
We only use cookies that are necessary for this site to function to provide you with the best experience. The controller of this site may choose to place supplementary cookies to support additional functionality such as support analytics, and has an obligation to disclose these cookies. Learn more in our
Cookie Statement
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Farmers.gov sent this bulletin at 11/18/2023 10:00 AM EST
Trouble viewing this email?
View it as a webpage
.
The newsletter
is brought to you by the
USDA Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
Opportunities
EPA’s
Research for Understanding PFAS Uptake and Bioaccumulation in Plants and Animals in Agricultural, Rural, and Tribal Communities
is open.
Application deadline: Dec
.
6, 2023.
USDA’s
Farm Labor Stabilization and Protection Pilot Program
helps
improve food and agricultural supply chain resiliency.
Application deadline: Jan
.
3, 2024
.
F
ood Nutrition Service
’s
Farm to School Grants
help connect students to the sources of their food through education, taste tests, school gardens, field trips, and local food sourcing for school meals.
Application deadline:
Jan
.
12, 2024
.
USDA’s
Discrimination Financial Assistance Program
is open
to farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners who experienced discrimination from USDA farm lending programs prior to January 2021. Application details (in English and Spanish), office locations, and local events are listed at
22007apply.gov
. Filing an application is FREE and does not require a lawyer.
Application deadline: Jan. 13, 2024.
Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program e-Solution Grant
s
are open
to
S
tate agencies, Indian Tribal Organizations and territories, or multi-state agency collaborations.
Application deadline: Jan. 23, 2024.
Rural Development’s
Rural Energy for America Program Renewable Energy Systems & Energy Efficiency Improvement Guaranteed Loans & Grants
provide funding to agricultural producers and rural small businesses for renewable energy systems or to make energy efficiency improvements.
Multiple deadlines in 2023 and 2024.
EPA is requesting applications for the 2024
President’s Environmental Youth Awards
and
Presidential Innovation Awards for Environmental Educators
.
USDA Highlights
The USDA Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production (OUAIP) has launched a USDA
Innovative Production webpage
. Learn
how
USDA is growing innovation across the food supply chain.
The Risk Management Agency developed a webpage featuring
Crop Insurance for Innovative Producers and Urban Farmers
. Take a deeper dive on risk management options with the latest
Ask the Expert
.
USDA’s 100
th
annual
Agricultural Outlook Forum
will be held
Feb
.
15-16, 2024
.
Register for virtual or in-person attendance
.
In-person location is the Crystal City Gateway Marriott, Arlington, VA.
Over the first 97 years the forum has primarily focused on the needs of large scale, commercial agriculture, but in the last three years it has expanded to include urban agriculture and innovative production. This year, the Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production and the Agricultural Marketing Service has organized a session with partners that focuses on the relationship between rural and urban organizations to create market opportunities for farmers.
Stay tuned for additional information
as the forum approaches
!
OUAIP’s Grant Program is bringing together
diverse urban farms in Boston
.
Calling all students – two opportunities for you! NRCS is hiring
Pathway Student Trainees
nationwide.
Deadlines vary by location.
The USDA
1994 Tribal Scholars Program
is also open.
Application deadline: Dec. 1, 2023.
FSA is mailing ballots for the
2023 County Committee Elections
to all eligible agricultural producers and private landowners across the country. Producers and landowners must return ballots to their local FSA county office or have their ballots be postmarked by
Dec. 4, 2023
, for those ballots to be counted.
USDA’s Economic Research Service released the report:
Household Food Security in the United States in 2022
.
Pittsburgh, PA will soon have an
Urban Soil Survey
. Thanks to input and assistance from local partners, Allegheny County Conservation District and the University of Pittsburg, NRCS has announced plans to survey and map the city.
Federal Advisory Committee
The seventh public meeting of the Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Advisory Committee will be held
Nov. 29, 2023, 1:00 PM – 3:00 PM EST
. The public may attend via Zoom with
advance registration
. Written comments will be accepted via
Federal Register Notice
until Dec. 13, 2023, and will be shared with Committee members for consideration. The final agenda will be posted on the
Federal Advisory Committee
website prior to the meeting.
General questions and comments can be emailed to
UrbanAgricultureFederalAdvisoryCommittee@usda.gov
.
People’s Garden Initiative
The
Back to School People’s Garden webinar recording
is now available.
If you would like to stay updated on the latest offerings from the Food Nutrition Service Team
, sign up for the
Team Nutrition e-newsletter in
English
and
Spanish
and
The Dirt
!
Celebrating the great work of
Not Forgotten Outreach
, a USDA People’s Garden dedicated to creating community programs that benefit military veterans and their families.
Farewell and Thanks to Jorge, Our Headquarters People’s Gardener
Happy Compromise Farm: Nourishing Their Community, Body and Sou
l
What We’re Reading
Sucking up toxins: Using trees to clean up contamination goes international
Best Practices for Food Production in Areas Suspected of Contamination
FAO The State of Food and Agriculture 2023
The Great Underappreciated Driver of Climate Change
Why not all cities are welcoming community composters
Food justice advocates didn’t set out to save the climate. Their solutions are doing it anyway
In Case You Missed It
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency released two new reports quantifying methane emissions from landfilled food waste and updating recommendations for managing wasted food:
“
From Field to Bin: The Environmental Impacts of U.S. Food Waste Management Pathways (Part 2)
” examines the environmental impacts of managing food waste. This report completes the review that began in the 2021 companion report, “
From Farm to Kitchen: The Environmental Impacts of U.S. Food Waste (Part 1)
,” which analyzed the environmental footprint of food waste in the farm to consumer supply chain. Based on these findings, the report presents a new
Wasted Food Scale
, an EPA graphic tool to help decision makers understand the best options for managing food waste in terms of environmental impacts.
The second report, “
Quantifying Methane Emissions from Landfilled Food Waste
,” presents EPA’s first ever published modeled estimates of annual methane emissions released into the atmosphere from landfilled food waste.
The U.S. Composting Council “
Making Waves
” Conference is scheduled for Feb. 6-9, 2024, in Daytona, FL.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology is hosting a
Food Waste Reduction and Recovery Workshop
from Dec. 5-7, 2023.
The Institute for Local Self-Reliance developed a
Healthy Soils and Compost Policy Guide
highlighting opportunities for policy to simultaneously support food waste composting and practices that build soil health.
The USDA Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production wishes you and your family a happy harvest,
nourishing
food, and lots of fun this holiday season!
Sign up for E-mail updates on Urban Agriculture
CONTACT US:
Farm Service Agency
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Risk Management Agency
Service Center Locator
SUBSCRIBER SERVICES:
Manage Subscriptions
|
Help
Subscribe to updates from Farmers.gov
Email Address
e.g. name@example.com
Share Bulletin
Powered by
Privacy Policy
|
Cookie Statement
|
Help