Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
We only use cookies that are necessary for this site to function to provide you with the best experience. The controller of this site may choose to place supplementary cookies to support additional functionality such as support analytics, and has an obligation to disclose these cookies. Learn more in our
Cookie Statement
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Farmers.gov sent this bulletin at 03/22/2024 10:58 AM EDT
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
The newsletter
is brought to you by the
USDA Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
Opportunities
OUAIP’s
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Grant
program is now accepting proposals that support communities in growing or expanding access to fresh, local food.
Application deadline: April 9, 2024.
EPA’s Climate Pollution Reduction Grants include a
general competition
and
tribes and territories competition
.
General deadline: April 1, 2024. Tribes and Territories deadline: May 1, 2024.
NIFA’s
Beginning Farmer and Rancher Development Program
supports education, mentoring, and technical assistance initiatives for beginning farmers and ranchers.
Application deadline: April 4, 2024.
FSA and T.I.M.E. Inc. are offering the
Urban and Innovative Agriculture Community-Based Funding Opportunity
in
11 U.S. locations
.
Application deadline: April 10, 2024.
NIFA’s
Gus Schumacher Nutrition Incentive Program
brings together stakeholders from across the food system to increase understanding of how to leverage Federal nutrition assistance programs to improve food insecurity.
Application deadline: May 14, 2024.
AMS’s Local Agriculture Market Program is accepting applications for the
Farmers Market Promotion Program
,
Local Food Promotion Program
, and
Regional Food System Partnerships Program
.
Application deadline: May 14, 2024.
EPA’s Community Change Grants Program
supports environmental and climate justice activities.
Technical assistance
for grant preparation is available. Applications will be accepted on a rolling basis.
Final application deadline: Nov. 21, 2024.
RMA’s
Nursery Value Select
enables nursery producers to select the dollar amount coverage that best fits their risk management needs
. Now
open to all
states and counties
.
Multiple deadlines.
Rural Development’s
Rural Energy for America Program, Renewable Energy Systems, and Energy Efficiency Improvement Guaranteed Loans & Grants
fund renewable energy systems
to
help make energy efficiency improvements for agricultural producers and rural small businesses.
Multiple deadlines.
RMA’s Micro Farm Program
provides a risk management safety net for all commodities on a farm under one insurance policy. This insurance plan is tailored for any farm with up to $350,000 in approved revenue.
Sales closing date varies.
Federal Advisory Committee
The next
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Advisory Committee
meeting
will take place
April 10
,
2
-
4 p.m. ET
.
Register
to attend the meeting virtually
and view
the
Federal Register Notice
.
Public comments will be accepted for this meeting until April 24,
via email
.
The Committee’s 12 members
advise
the Secretary of Agriculture on the development of policies and outreach relating to urban, indoor, and other emerging agriculture production practices as well as
identify
barriers to urban agriculture.
USDA Highlights
The
National Urban Agriculture Conference
is scheduled for Aug. 4-6 in Detroit, Michigan. Registration opens soon! Sign-up for conference updates and provide suggestions and feedback.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
Grant
Video
Highlight:
Grow Dat
Youth Farm
USDA Agricultural Outlook Forum
recordings and presentation slides are available on-demand, including the session “Expanding Market Access through Urban-Rural Networks.”
The Forest Service and Natural Inquirer have partnered to bring you
Nature Health Benefits LIVE
!
Learn about a research study on greening vacant lots, the physical health benefits of being in nature, the mental health benefits of being in nature, and SO much more!
OUAIP recently attended
Indoor Ag-Con
and presented with other department experts on “USDA’s Growing Vision for Controlled Environment Agriculture.”  Learn how USDA is supporting
Innovative Production
.
Join USDA, Department of Energy, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Clemson University, and industry partners for the
2024 Joint Controlled Environment Agriculture workshop
scheduled for July 9-12, in Charleston, S
.
C.
Registration is open
.
People’s Garden Initiative
Headquarters People’s Garden
:
Spring is
nearly here
! The crocuses, tulips, and garlic we planted this winter are sprouting, bringing with them some beautiful greenery to the garden. In preparation for the upcoming warmer weather, we have been busy planting some of our earlier garden crops in the greenhouse. This includes more cold-hardy garden plants such as kale, collards, and cabbage. We also have planted a few varieties of native flowers to be added throughout the garden to encourage and support native pollinators and beneficial insects.
People’s Gardens Around the World
:
Welcome to the
Spangdahlem Community Garden, the first People’s Garden on a U.S. military base and first registered international garden. Located in Spangdahlem,
Germany,
the community garden offers military personnel and family members the opportunity to foster new friendships, encourages social activity, and embrace social responsibility through sustainable living. According to Rachael Kohlwey, Program Manager, “learning how to grow, propagate, proliferate, and share edible organically grown foods offers more than knowledge, it offers a sustainable way of life.” The garden was built by 250 base volunteers dedicating over 450 hours of their time, including weekends and holidays using upcycled materials.
It
consists of 100% organic Hügelkultur garden raised beds and offers Americans living in a foreign country a small taste of the life they had back home, develop lifelong friendships, and sustainable gardening skills while improving the mental, physical, and spiritual health of all who
participate
.
Xerces Conservation Corner: Collembola & Farming with Soil Life:
As we transition to spring, your garden plants and the insect critters that live within and around your garden will begin to wake up. You might notice tiny “bugs” jumping around within the soil surface and leaf litter. But not to worry, these tiny springtail critters play an important role in your soil's health! Springtails (Collembola) are small arthropods, about the size of a grain of rice or smaller (0.25mm-5mm), that live in the soil surface litter and vegetation, decaying logs, fungi, and under bark. They can be found in all terrestrial habitats, from deserts to rainforests, and are dominant in arctic soils. As decomposers and fungal foragers, springtails play a crucial role in nitrogen cycling and plant growth.
To find some collembola in your garden or yard, shake some leaf litter in a clear shallow dish and look very carefully! Springtails are known to jump around so keep an eye out for movement. A magnifying glass or hand lens will help you see more closely! Collembola are generally round and compact in shape with six legs, and one pair of antennae, and vary in color from orange to purple, white, gray, or brown. Learn more about springtails and other important soil life, check out our
Farming with Soil Life Handbook
,
Pocket Guide
, and
YouTube playlist
.
Finally, enjoy the latest edition of
Fridays on the Farm: Growing Urban Opportunities in the Ozarks
to see how CoxHealth and Springfield Community Gardens, a People’s Garden, are using USDA assistance to grow unique opportunities in their area.
In Case You Missed It
Apprenticeship
USA
has two upcoming opportunities:
Join the Agriculture Industry Registered Apprenticeship Community of Practice (CoP) meeting April 9 at 2 p.m. ET. The April meeting will focus on youth apprenticeship programs. Send an email to
agricultureapprenticehip@dol.gov
to join the CoP email list and receive meeting details. To learn more, visit the
Agriculture industry page
.
Participate in the
Inaugural Youth Apprenticeship Week
from May 5-11 and learn about the benefits of Registered Apprenticeship program for youth, ages 16-24.
The Environmental Protection Agency recently released
Educating Youth About Wasted Food
and the
EPA
Wasted Food Scale
in additional languages
.
U
pcoming Webinars:
In the Life of the Bumble Bee Queen (And the Cuckoo Too!), March 28, 1-2 p.m. ET.
Webinar Registration
. Catch up with Pollinator Friendly Alliance and Xerces Best Practices for Pollinator Summit - recordings are now available on
YouTube
or
webpage
.
SCIENCEx Webinar Series
, including
Managing Urban Forests
, March 28, 2-3 p.m. ET.
Webinar Registration
.
What We’re Reading
The Million-Dollar Business of Wood Waste in the US
(The Hustle)
How mapping 'heat islands' can help cities prepare for extreme heat
(NPR)
Don’t Spoil the Soil: The Challenge of Contamination at Composting Sites
(Closed Loop Partners).
Sign up for E-mail updates on Urban Agriculture
CONTACT US:
Farm Service Agency
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Risk Management Agency
Service Center Locator
SUBSCRIBER SERVICES:
Manage Subscriptions
|
Help
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer and lender. To file a complaint of discrimination, write: USDA, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, Office of Adjudication, 1400 Independence Ave., SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (866) 632-9992 (Toll-free Customer Service), (800) 877-8339 (Local or Federal relay), (866) 377-8642 (Relay voice users).
Subscribe to updates from Farmers.gov
Email Address
e.g. name@example.com
Share Bulletin
Powered by
Privacy Policy
|
Cookie Statement
|
Help