Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
We only use cookies that are necessary for this site to function to provide you with the best experience. The controller of this site may choose to place supplementary cookies to support additional functionality such as support analytics, and has an obligation to disclose these cookies. Learn more in our
Cookie Statement
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Farmers.gov sent this bulletin at 01/03/2024 12:02 PM EST
Trouble viewing this email?
View it as a webpage
.
The newsletter
is brought to you by the
USDA Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
Opportunities
Farm to School Grants
help connect students to the sources of their food through education, taste tests, school gardens, field trips, and local food sourcing for school meals.
Application deadline: Jan. 12, 2024.
Discrimination Financial Assistance Program
is open to producers who experienced discrimination from USDA farm lending programs prior to January 2021. Filing an application is FREE and does not require a lawyer.
Application
deadline: Jan. 13, 2024.
EPA's 2024
President’s Environmental Youth Awards
and 2024
Presidential Innovation Awards for Environmental Educators
is open for nominees.
Application deadline: Jan. 15, 2024.
Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program e-Solution Grants
are open to State agencies, Indian Tribal Organizations and territories, or multi-state agency collaborations.
Application deadline: Jan. 23, 2024.
School Food System Transformation Challenge Sub-Grants
has two open opportunities: Supporting Community Agriculture & Local Education Systems,
Application deadline: Jan. 26, 2024;
and the Chef Ann Foundation’s Local Agriculture & Nutrition Transformation in Schools Sub-Grants,
Application deadline: Jan. 22, 2024
.
Food Safety Certification for Specialty Crops Program
, assists producers who incurred on-farm food safety program expenses related to obtaining or renewing a food safety certification in calendar years 2023.
Application deadline: Jan. 31, 2024.
Risk Management Agency’s (RMA) Whole-Farm Revenue Protection
provides a risk management safety net for all commodities on the farm under one policy.
Sales closing date:
Jan.
31, 2024.
RMA’s Micro Farm Program
provides a risk management safety net for all commodities on a farm under one insurance policy. This insurance plan is tailored for any farm with up to $350,000 in approved revenue.
Sales closing
date: Feb.
28, 2024
.
USDA Forest Service
Urban & Community Forestry 2024 Challenge Cost Share Grant Program
.
Application deadline: Feb. 29, 2024.
EPA’s Community Change Grants Program
has announced $2 billion dollars in Inflation Reduction Act funds for environmental and climate justice activities.
Technical assistance
to prepare a grant application is available.
Application deadline: Nov. 21, 2024.
Rural Development’s
Rural Energy for America Program Renewable Energy Systems & Energy Efficiency Improvement Guaranteed Loans & Grants
fund renewable energy systems or to make energy efficiency improvements for agricultural producers and rural small businesses.
Multiple deadlines.
Federal Funding Tip
: Interested in applying for future Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production funding or other Federal opportunities? Eligible applicants for Federal grant and cooperative agreement opportunities may require an active
Sam.gov
and
Grants.gov
registration to apply. Register in these systems
now
so you are ready when the opportunities are open.
USDA Highlights
Can I Grow Here?
USDA’s Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production (OUAIP) is partnering with the
Center for Agriculture and Food Systems
at Vermont Law and Graduate Schoolto develop resources that help growers understand and work through local policies.
USDA is now accepting applications for farm loans online
. Learn which loan is right for you using the
Farm Loan Assistance Tool
.
The Veterans Business Outreach Center of New England, in partnership with the USDA, invite veterans, transitioning service members, and military spouses to Boots to Business Reboot for Veteran Beginning Farmers and Ranchers on
Jan. 22, 2024; 10 am – 5 pm EST
. Space is limited, please
register
early.
The
Regional Food Business Centers
are beginning to operate and several have websites up and running. The centers are in the early stages of planning their programming, technical assistance, and capacity building activities. Their websites offer an overview of their planned work and current partners.
The Indigenous Food Sovereignty Initiative has a variety of resources focused on traditional food, including the fun children’s educational series,
Sovereignty Gardens
. View
additional resources
offered under the initiative.
Check out the latest
Ask the Expert: How Urban Service Center Staff Can Help You Grow
.
USDA’s 100
th
annual
Agricultural Outlook Forum
will be held
Feb
.
15-16, 2024.
Register for virtual or in-person attendance
.
The USDA Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production (OUAIP) has launched a USDA
Innovative Production webpage
. Learn how USDA is growing innovation across the food supply chain.
The Risk Management Agency developed a webpage featuring
Crop Insurance for Innovative Producers and Urban Farmers
. Take a deeper dive on risk management options with the latest
Ask the Expert
.
People’s Garden Initiative
Area 2 Farms, a People’s Garden located in Arlington, VA is an indoor, organic, soil-based farm.
Learn more
about their innovative operation and engagement with USDA.
The new
Plant Hardiness Zone Map
is now available, updating a valuable tool for gardeners and growers to determine which plants are more likely to thrive at a location.
On
Jan
.
15, 2024
, consider spending Martin Luther King Jr. Day volunteering in your community to provide access to fresh, local food. Find a
People’s Garden
near you. Interested in joining the network?
Register
your public garden and connect with fellow community gardens from across the country.
In Case You Missed It
The
Draft National Strategy for Reducing Food Loss and Waste and Recycling Organics
is released. EPA, USDA, and FDA request public comments on the draft strategy by Jan. 4, 2024. Submit your comments through
the Federal Register
or
gov, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OLEM-2022-0415.
People from across the world attended
COP28
from Nov. 30 – Dec. 12, where
over 130 countries sign COP28 pledge to integrate food into climate action
.
What We’re Reading
University of Maryland Urban Agriculture Guidebook
COP28 Agriculture, Food and Climate National Action Plan
How America Is Making Tree Equity a Climate Solution for Cities
Sign up for E-mail updates on Urban Agriculture
CONTACT US:
Farm Service Agency
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Risk Management Agency
Service Center Locator
SUBSCRIBER SERVICES:
Manage Subscriptions
|
Help
Subscribe to updates from Farmers.gov
Email Address
e.g. name@example.com
Share Bulletin
Powered by
Privacy Policy
|
Cookie Statement
|
Help