Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
We only use cookies that are necessary for this site to function to provide you with the best experience. The controller of this site may choose to place supplementary cookies to support additional functionality such as support analytics, and has an obligation to disclose these cookies. Learn more in our
Cookie Statement
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Farmers.gov sent this bulletin at 04/12/2023 10:19 AM EDT
Trouble viewing this email?
View it as a webpage
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Opportunities
USDA Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
Composting and Food Waste Reduction Cooperative Agreements:
applications due in
Grants.gov
on June 15, 2023.
Rural Development
Value-Added Producer Grant Program
: is open: paper applications due May 16, 2023, electronic applications due May 11, 2023.
National Institute of Food and Agriculture
Beginning Farmer and Rancher Development Program
: applications due April 27, 2023.
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Equity in Conservation Outreach
: applications due April 27, 2023.
Agricultural Marketing Service offers the following opportunities through the Local Agriculture Market Program: applications due May 2, 2023.
Farmers Market Promotion Program
Local Food Promotion Program
Regional Food System Partnerships
Environmental Protection Agency opportunities:
Climate Pollution Reduction Grants
: applications due April 28, 2023.
Pollution Prevention Grant: Environmental Justice in Communities
: applications due June 6, 2023.
Pollution Prevention Grant: Environmental Justice Through Safer and More Sustainable Products
: applications due June 20, 2023.
Highlights from USDA
Urban Producers, Public Invited to Attend
April Meeting of Federal Advisory Committee for Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
on April 18, 2023 at 3 p.m. ET.
Register to attend
.
Interested in learning more about Farm Service Agency loan programs? Check-out
FSA Loans: The Ins and Outs of Growing a Farm with Federal Loans
.
National Institute of Food and Agriculture Invests $9.4M in
Urban, Indoor, and other Emerging Agricultural Production Research, Education and Extension Initiative
.
The Food Nutrition Service’s
Selling Local Food to Schools: A Resource for Producers
provides helpful information for opportunities to help nourish children in your community.
This month, the USDA Economic Research Service released the
Rural Food-Away-from-Home (FAFH) Landscape, 1990-2019 report
which examines U.S. nonmetropolitan counties and the trends and differentiating features in FAFH access.
“Everybody I've worked with at NRCS has been extremely helpful, this has really been a game changer for me,” Learn more about Brandon Gerard’s story at
Fridays on the Farm: Growing Abundance in Spokane.
People’s Garden
Join the People’s Garden community of over 1,200 gardens by registering at
usda.gov/peoples-garden
. In joining the network, your garden will be highlighted on the People’s Garden website and provided a sign to display in the garden. By joining the People’s Garden network, you will be granted access to the People’s Garden
Connect
subgroup, a platform to share resources and ideas with gardens across the country.
Attend the inaugural People’s Garden Webinar on April 26 at 3 p.m. ET. The webinar kicks off National Garden Month with a special message from Mrs. Christie Vilsack, and includes presentations about our country’s rich gardening history and success stories from the Food and Nutrition Service Farm to School grantees. (
Register for the webinar here
).
Interested in learning what other gardens are up to? Check out our featured gardens this month.
Natural Resources Conservation Service and Seeds of Faith Collective
Natural Resources Conservation Service
in Texas and Seeds of Faith Collective
celebrated the groundbreaking
of a new
People’s Garden
at Greater Garth Chapel A.M.E in Dallas, Texas.  In an open space behind the chapel, Grow North Texas Executive Director Susie Marshall and garden steward Candace Thompson maintain a food garden that has been successful in growing vegetables for the community. There are opportunities for community collaboration through volunteering and upcoming educational workshops. The garden is also working with the
Xerces Society
to implement pollinator plantings.  The Seeds of Faith Collective People’s Garden offers a local gathering place in Dallas for the community to visit, enjoy, and learn about sustainable food production.
Montgomery Subaru
Montgomery Subaru considers themselves to be more than just a car dealership with their community garden project. Since it was established in 2015, they have more than tripled its size and created a "Garden Share" for two special Montgomery area non-profits, Friendship Mission and Montgomery Area Council on Aging. They are fortunate to have a long growing season in Alabama and leverage that to provide nutrient-dense produce to people in need in their area.
What We’re Reading
OUAIP staff picks for the month:
‘A living pantry’: how an urban food forest in Arizona became a model for climate action
The little-known physical and mental health benefits of urban trees
Comparative Analysis of Zoning of Food Retail and Urban Agriculture for Richmond, Virginia (vcu.edu)
ChangeLab Solutions Legal & Policy Strategies for Health Care & Food System Partners
In Case You Missed It
March was National Nutrition Month! This year’s theme was “Fuel for the Future,” encouraging everyone to eat healthy at all life stages. Check out
Nutrition.gov
and their
Nutrition by Life Stage page
for more info.
Healthy Food Policy Project
identifies and elevates local laws that seek to promote access to healthy food while also contributing to strong local economies, an improved environment, and health equity, with a focus on socially disadvantaged and marginalized groups.
Celebrate
Food Waste Prevention Week
April 10-16! This message from 1914 still rings true today:
CONTACT US:
Farm Service Agency
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Risk Management Agency
Service Center Locator
SUBSCRIBER SERVICES:
Manage Subscriptions
|
Help
Subscribe to updates from Farmers.gov
Email Address
e.g. name@example.com
Share Bulletin
Powered by
Privacy Policy
|
Cookie Statement
|
Help