Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
We only use cookies that are necessary for this site to function to provide you with the best experience. The controller of this site may choose to place supplementary cookies to support additional functionality such as support analytics, and has an obligation to disclose these cookies. Learn more in our
Cookie Statement
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Farmers.gov sent this bulletin at 07/14/2023 11:59 AM EDT
Trouble viewing this email?
View it as a webpage
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Opportunities
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
Regional Conservation Partnership Program
has up to $500 million available for fiscal year 2023. Priorities include urban agriculture, climate smart agriculture and working with Historically Underserved Farmers and Ranchers.
Application deadline:
August 18, 2023
.
Agricultural Marketing Service opportunities:
Indigenous Animals Grant Program
provides up to $50 million dollars to support Tribal Nations expand or enhance indigenous animals and meat processing capacity in Indian Country.
Application deadline
:
July 19, 2023
.
Local Meat Capacity Grant Program
provides up to $75 million in grants to fund innovative projects designed to build resilience in the meat and poultry supply chain by providing more local processing options and strengthening market potential.
Application deadline
:
July 19, 2023
.
Organic Market Development Grant
has approximately $75 million available to support the development of new and expanded organic markets.
Application deadline
:
August 8, 2023
.
Resilient Food Systems Infrastructure Program
(RFSI) will provide up to $420 million for states and territories to make subawards through competitive Infrastructure Grants to expand aggregation, manufacturing, storing, transporting, wholesaling, and distribution capacity and infrastructure for domestic food and farm businesses. States and territories may also use a limited portion of RFSI funds to conduct complementary supply chain activities that build state-level capacity in local and regional food systems development and support the success of Infrastructure Grant subaward recipients.
Start Plan Due Date
:
August 23, 2023
.
U.S. Forest Service
Urban & Community Forestry National Challenge Cost Share Grant Program
is providing up to $500,000 for Urban and Community Forestry investments that address the
National Ten Year Urban and Community Forestry Action Plan
: Goal 5 Improve Urban and Community Forest Management, Maintenance and Stewardship.
Application deadline
:
August 15, 2023.
Foreign Agriculture Service
Cochran Fellowship Program
has an open opportunity for Minority Serving Institutions to educate Cochran Fellows on best practices within urban agriculture, including community building to increase global food security.
Applications due
:
July 31, 2023
.
Farm Service Agency is now accepting nominations for farmers and ranchers to serve on
local county committees
.
Nomination form deadline (all nomination forms must be postmarked or received in the local FSA office):
August 1, 2023
.
Highlights from USDA
USDA’s Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production (OUAIP) staff continue to travel around the country to learn from our partners and producers!
USDA Undersecretary Robert Bonnie and OUAIP staff had the pleasure of attending the
Indoor AgTech Innovation Summit
, joining over 500 Controlled Environment Agriculture (CEA) leaders discussing CEA’s role in providing sustainable, accessible food. Undersecretary Bonnie provided an Opening Keynote address titled, “USDA's Definition of Agriculture is Broadening” describing the various ways that USDA plays a role in supporting innovative producers.
While in NYC, staff had wonderful visits with the following urban agriculture and innovative production leaders:
NY Sun Works
(
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
grant recipient)
NYC Dept. of Sanitation and Big Reuse (
Composting and Food Waste Reduction
recipient)
Urban Soils Institute
and
Earth Matter
(People’s Gardens)
Finally, the dynamic conversations continued between Undersecretary Bonnie, OUAIP’s Director Guse, and NYC Stakeholders including Qiana Mickie, Executive Director of NYC Office of Urban Agriculture, Annette Nielsen, Executive Director of Hunter Food Policy Center, Sheryll Durrant and Monti Lawson, NYC Urban County Committee Members, FSA State Executive Director Jim Barber, and Kendall Hough and Damali Wynter from New York’s Agriculture Commissioner’s office.
Across the country in Ohio, OUAIP staff also attended and presented at the
Workshop on Advancing Controlled Environment Agriculture on Land and in Space in the Next 20 Years
, an event jointly sponsored by USDA, the Department of Energy, and NASA and hosted by the University of Toledo.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Federal Advisory Committee
The sixth public meeting of the Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Advisory Committee will be held
August 1, 2023, 3:00 PM – 6:00 PM EDT
. The public may attend via Zoom and registration is required (see link below). Written comments will be accepted via regulations.gov until August 15, 2023 (see link below). General questions and comments can be emailed to
UrbanAgricultureFederalAdvisoryCommittee@usda.gov
.
Meeting Registration Link
Federal Register Notice / Written Comments
People’s Garden Initiative
Join the People’s Garden movement of over 1,400 gardens today by registering at
usda.gov/peoples-garden
. In joining the network, your garden will be highlighted on the People’s Garden website and provided a sign to display in the garden. You will also be invited to network with gardens from across the country.
The next segment of the People’s Garden free webinar series is titled “Gardens Unifying Cultures and Communities” on June 27 at 3 p.m. EST. Explore the links between culture and gardening and see how communities come together through gardening. Registration link can be found at
People’s Garden Webinars
along with previous webinar recordings.
Interested in learning what other gardens are up to? Check out our featured gardens this month.
Pennsylvania NRCS awarded funding to
Urban Tree Connection
, a community-based organization in West Philadelphia. With the financial support provided, they were able to grow nearly 3,000 pounds of produce using sustainable growing practices. The project saw the group appoint community leaders as block captains and nearly 75 families were given fresh food on a biweekly basis.
Love the people! Feed the people!
That’s the slogan that this farm project spreads for the community to live by.
The
Giving Garden
of Gainesville, FL believes access to organic, fresh produce should be a right, not a privilege. They’re on a journey to bridge the gap between underserved community members and local, quality food. Check-out
their video
to learn more.
What We’re Reading
Controlled Environment Agriculture Water Circularity Best Practices Guide
Can a City Feed Itself?
Urban farms find success amid ongoing drought, extreme heat in San Antonio (ksat.com)
Earning from lucrative urban farming - New Vision Official
In Case You Missed It
NRCS Spanish Language 4-Part Webinar Series:
6, 2023; 2 p.m. EST:
Conservación de polinizadores 101
23, 2023; 2 p.m. EST:
Conservación de polinizadores e insectos beneficiosos en tierras agrícolas
30, 2023; 2 p.m. EST:
Biodiversidad climáticamente inteligente y conservación del carbono en tierras agrícolas
6, 2023; 2 p.m. EST:
Conservación de polinizadores y plantaciones de hábitat climáticamente inteligentes en granjas urbanas y jardines comunitarios
National Farmers Market Week is August 6-12! How do you plan to celebrate? Check out Farmers Market Coalition’s (FMC) National Farmers Market Week Toolkit - it's full of all the resources you need (including social media graphics, templates, planning guides, and more) to start planning your celebration today! Visit the
FMC website
to download your copy.
The EPA is currently soliciting survey participants for its
Anaerobic Digestion Data Collection Project
. Deadline to submit surveys is July 31.
Did you know July 10
th
was National Don’t Step on a Bee Day? In addition to the webinars listed above, check out the Xerces
Pollinator Conservation Resource Center
for region-specific resources to support pollinator habitat.
CONTACT US:
Farm Service Agency
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Risk Management Agency
Service Center Locator
SUBSCRIBER SERVICES:
Manage Subscriptions
|
Help
Subscribe to updates from Farmers.gov
Email Address
e.g. name@example.com
Share Bulletin
Powered by
Privacy Policy
|
Cookie Statement
|
Help