Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
We only use cookies that are necessary for this site to function to provide you with the best experience. The controller of this site may choose to place supplementary cookies to support additional functionality such as support analytics, and has an obligation to disclose these cookies. Learn more in our
Cookie Statement
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Farmers.gov sent this bulletin at 09/18/2023 10:03 AM EDT
Trouble viewing this email?
View it as a webpage
.
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News
Opportunities
USDA Risk Management Agency’s
Whole-Farm Revenue Protection
and
Micro Farm programs
insure revenue earned through sales of crops and value-added products, thereby helping growers manage risk.
Beginning or Veteran Farmers
may receive reduced premiums. Learn more and find a crop insurance agent near you at RMA’s
Agent Locator Tool
,
our webpage
, or
regional office
.
Application Deadline: Ongoing.
USDA Food and Nutrition Service
Farm To School Technical Assistance-Cooperative Agreements
help nonprofits and Tribal Organizations implement national- and/or regional-level farm to school activities.
Application Deadline: Oct. 10, 2023.
U.S. Forest Service
Forest Landowner Support
provides financial assistance for underserved and small-acreage forest landowners to participate in emerging private markets for climate mitigation and forest resilience.
Application deadline: Oct. 21, 2023.
USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture
Community Food Projects Competitive Grants
aim to reduce food insecurity while improving access to services.
Application deadline
:
Oct. 30, 2023.
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
Conservation Innovation Grants
are dedicating $65 million for the development of new tools, approaches, practices and technologies for natural resource conservation on private lands.
Application deadline: Oct. 30, 2023.
USDA’s
Discrimination Financial Assistance Program
is open to farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners who experienced discrimination from USDA farm lending programs prior to January 2021. Application details (in English and Spanish), office locations, and local events are listed at
22007apply.gov
. Filing an application is FREE and does not require a lawyer.
Application deadline: Oct. 31, 2023.
Healthy Food Financing Initiative (HFFI) Partnerships Program
supports capacity building and capital for local, regional, or state food financing programs.
Application deadline: Nov. 3, 2023.
Environmental Protection Agency’s Office of Brownfields and Land Revitalization is
soliciting applications
from Tribal Nations and entities to provide specialized technical assistance for brownfield programs and reuse.
Application deadline: Nov. 13, 2023.
Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program e-Solution Grant
is open for interested state agencies, Indian Tribal Organizations and territories, or multi-state agency collaborations.
Application deadline for fiscal year 2024: Jan. 23, 2024.
USDA is hosting virtual and in-person
Controlled Environment Insurance Program Informational Sessions
to introduce a new Federal Crop Insurance program that provides greenhouse growers an opportunity to insure against losses due to destruction orders based on detection of plant disease vectors.
Learn about establishing a
Registered Apprenticeship Program
, including high demand
agriculture apprenticeship occupations
to help create a future workforce, improve productivity, and reduce turn-over.
Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production on the Road
Richmond, Virginia Urban Service Center Opening
USDA Staff, Virginia State University, Virginia Cooperative Extension, and community stakeholders met at the Miles Jones Elementary school to celebrate the opening of Richmond’s USDA Urban Service Center. The event highlighted the importance of urban agriculture to Richmond’s Southside neighborhoods and beyond. Urban ag producers and technical experts, including former Deputy Secretary of Agriculture Jewel Bronaugh, held a panel discussion on the benefits of urban agriculture to local economies and food systems.
New Orleans, Louisiana Urban Service Center
Opening
The USDA Urban Service Center in New Orleans was opened by NRCS State Conservationist Richard Kacir and FSA State Executive Director Ronald Guidry along with USDA staff, FSA Urban County Committee members, Louisiana State Agriculture Center Extension, the Soil and Water Conservation District, urban growers, city officials, and local businesses. “The office is in the perfect location within the community, and we want everyone to feel welcome when they come here,” said Richard Kacir, NRCS State Conservationist.
Brownfields 2023
Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production (OUAIP) staff attended
Brownfields 2023
where they shared information on USDA resources that support climate-resilient food systems. Best practices across government, industry, and the community on the remediation and redevelopment of contaminated properties, known as brownfields, were shared. Visit EPA
Brownfields
and
Land Revitalization
for additional resources.
Urban Agriculture Conservation Forum 2023
The San Antonio Food Bank, with NRCS, FSA, and partners, presented agricultural workshops and demonstrations for urban/small acre farmers. Hands-on sessions included outdoor demos for using small farm tools, a rainfall simulator demonstrating soil health, and techniques for raised bed gardens. Attendees had opportunities for networking, learning new innovative approaches specific to small farms, and learning about financial and site-specific resource management ideas and options.
Composting and Food Waste Reduction Recipient Henderson County, North Carolina
OUAIP staff met with Henderson County to learn about the great things happening in their food waste composting facility. Their USDA Composting and Food Waste Reduction (CFWR) Cooperative Agreement was instrumental in providing power and equipment to the facility which is currently collecting food waste from six Henderson County Public Schools. County personnel sought out funding after their contract expired with a private hauler. The once public-private partnership is now a fully public operation, demonstrating that municipalities of all sizes have the capacity to implement their own composting and food waste reduction strategies.
Henderson County Environmental Programs Coordinator Amy Schmitte said, “The CFWR project has had a great impact on Henderson County and our ability to implement and expand the composting facility and programs. The County has increased diversion through the residential food waste drop off, expanded the school compost program, and increased home diversion methods by offering backyard compost bins to residents. We look forward to diverting additional food waste in the future through other collection sources like restaurants and farms.”
People’s Garden Initiative
Sign up to join the People’s Garden movement of over 1,400 gardens at
usda.gov/peoples-garden
today! In joining the community, your garden will be highlighted on the People’s Garden website, provided a sign to display in the garden, and invited to network with gardens from across the country.
USDA Headquarters Garden Highlights
If you are in Washington, D.C., join us for USDA’s Sukkot Celebration! Sukkot is known as the Festival of Booths, referring to temporary structures where the Jewish people dwelled during the exodus from Egypt.
When
: Friday, Sept. 29 10am-1pm ET
Schedule
:
10am – 12pm: Make Decorations at the USDA Farmers Market (USDA parking lot at 14th Street & Independence Ave., SW)
12 – 1pm: Sukkot Dedication Ceremony at USDA People’s Garden (Mall side of Whitten Building by 12th St. SW)
The event is sponsored by USDA’s Center for Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships in partnership with the USDA People’s Garden Initiative, USDA Farmers Market, Adamah, American Jewish Committee, Anti-Defamation League, Capital Jewish Museum, Jewish Farmer Network, and MAZON: A Jewish Response to Hunger.
People’s Garden Apiary
USDA staff recently harvested delicious, local honey from the People’s Garden Apiary located on top of the Jamie L. Whitten Building!
People’s Garden September Highlight
Following a simple motto – Germinate. Educate. Advocate – The
West Virginia University (WVU) Campus Food Garden
strives to empower the WVU community and all West Virginians to end food insecurity through garden-based education, advocacy for food justice, and community engagement. “Being a People’s Garden connects us with others who are engaged in America’s rich history of providing fresh, sustainably, and locally grown produce for our community,” a garden representative said. “Appalachia has long lived by the value of taking care of our own—both the land and the people who call it home. The combined efforts of our WVU Campus, local social services, and faith communities in this garden and urban farming project reflect the collaborative strength and relationships that bring out the best in us as we envision a more just and generous food future for our region.”
Xerces Ambassador Program
Our partners at the Xerces Society are
recruiting volunteer ambassadors
until Sept. 30. The program mobilizes volunteers to advance invertebrate conservation by participating in community science, organizational tasks, and community engagement.
What We’re Reading
Planting Tiny Indoor Farms in Strip Malls and Office Parks | Ambrook Research
Environmental Challenges Threatening the Growth of Urban Agriculture in the United States
.
Safety of Gardening on Lead- and Arsenic-Contaminated Urban Brownfields
In Case You Missed It
Modernizing SNAP Transactions with Local Farmers
.
Check out the new USDA
Urban Service Center video
!
The Farm Service Agency Increasing Land, Capital, and Market Access Program Projects
Biden-Harris Administration Invests More than $100 Million in Recycling Infrastructure Projects Through Investing in America Agenda
(including composting and food waste reduction!)
Biden-Harris Administration Invests $1 Billion for Nearly 400 Projects to Expand Access to Trees and Green Spaces in Communities and Neighborhoods Nationwide through Investing in America Agenda
The NRCS Pollinators and Beneficial Insects - Spanish Webinar Series is on-demand:
Conservación de polinizadores 101
Conservación de polinizadores e insectos beneficiosos en tierras agrícolas
Biodiversidad climáticamente inteligente y conservación del carbono en tierras agrícolas
Conservación de polinizadores y plantaciones de hábitat climáticamente inteligentes en granjas urbanas y jardines comunitarios
CONTACT US:
Farm Service Agency
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Risk Management Agency
Service Center Locator
SUBSCRIBER SERVICES:
Manage Subscriptions
|
Help
Subscribe to updates from Farmers.gov
Email Address
e.g. name@example.com
Share Bulletin
Powered by
Privacy Policy
|
Cookie Statement
|
Help