Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department,
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
Lecture -16
Ohmic Heating
Good Morning all. Today we are going to discuss about Ohmic heating. So, in this lecture we
are going to discuss about basics of Ohmic heating. And what are the lab and lab scale and
pilot scale systems available for Ohmic heating. And what are the critical parameters one
needs to consider while applying Ohmic heating for thermal processing of food. Actually, in
first 10 classes we have discussed enormously about the thermal processing conventional
thermal processing applied for the food materials. Then in last class, we have also discussed
about the microwave as well as the radio frequency heating. So which is nothing but the
normal processing food technologies 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:21)
Today we are going to discuss about the Ohmic heating principle. So, if we see convention
heating the major heat transfer mechanisms are Conduction, Conventional and Radiation. So,
the  conduction  mainly  applied  to  the  solid  food.  Convention  mostly  liquid  food  and
sometimes we may also, get liquid and particulate solids. Right the radiation comes when the
heating medium is use as the hot gaseous or sometimes microwave. So both steady as well as
unsteady  operations  steady  is  nothing  but  the  time  independent  unsteady  operation  is
dependent on time.Employing electrical energy directly into the food processing have attracted interest in the
food industry in the recent decades. So, instead of using the temperature so how do we do the
food processing by employing directly the electrical energy that is the way the Ohmic heating
concepts came up.
So, this is especially useful when particulate food particles are there on a commercial scale
provide  the  food processer with the  opportunity  to produce new  and value  added  food
products with enhanced to quality attribute. So, this is very much important since we are not
applying the temperature directly high temperature directly. So our quality attribute are much
more higher than compare to any other conventional thermal processing.
Also it is useful when the food particles contain the particulate matters which is difficult in
the thermal processing technique. Because if you remember, we have also told in the time of
heat exchanger there is such limitations, on how much the size of the particulate solid should
be well processing. So, this kind of restrictions can be relaxed in term of Ohmic heating. So,
it is especially designed to handle the food which has particulate solids. And, also it is proven
commercially to enhance the quality attributes of the food materials 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:51):
Ohmic heating is an electro heating technique based on the passage of electrical current
through a food product having electrical (persistent).  So, it works on the principle of Ohms
low so which you might have studied in your school science. So, you may be familiar with
which is nothing but V equal to IR. So, V is nothing but the voltage in volts and I is nothing
but a current in amperes and R is nothing but a electrical resistance.So, the current flowing through the liquid food is nothing but the V upon R. Voltage applied
across the electrodes and the resistance electrical resistance electrical conductivity of the food
material. Heat is generate instantly inside the food and it has amount is directly related to the
voltage gradient and the electrical conductivity. That is what I told voltage gradient applied
and electrical resistant one upon R is a nothing but electrical conductivity.
So what are the advantages, one is the lack of high voltage temperature so how do we do
normal convectional process, conventional thermal processing so if you have a solid food
particle. You suppose to apply here a heat so thus has to penetrate through the solids. It is
bases on the thermal conductivity. If it is a liquid it is a purely of convection phenomenon. So
every-where the heat has to penetrate through the walls of the container. 
So that it is  avoid here because your electrical  energy is  directly  applying to the food
material, liquid food products and limiting heat transfer coefficient requirement. So we have
also seen in our earlier lectures. So, if it is a solid conduction it is mainly base on the thermal
conductivity of the food or the food material. So, this thermal conductivity is only based on
the material the food material what we used.
So here it depends upon the heat transfer coefficient. So one thing we should remember here
is, this heat transfer coefficient, it is not only the property of the food particle the orientation
of the container and the velocity of the food material which is passing through the processing
system. So everything is into account with it is the function of many fact as. So in this case of
Ohmic heating so I do not have the limiting or constraint of heat transfer coefficient.
And, maintaining the color and nutritional value of the food as, I told already so the Ohmic
heating is the main requirement or the main aim of going for Ohmic heating is for two main
aspects. One is for quality attribute since, we are not applying the high temperature the color
and the nutritional value of food can be maintained and shorter processing time obviously.
Because we are directly employing the electrical energy to heat the food. And, higher yield
compare to conventional thermal technologies and rapid heat generation, Because it is also a
volumetric heating phenomenon. Because you are not doing it via surface, what you do in
conventional thermal processing techniques and it is a volumetric heat generation. 
So that it is why, rapid heat generation would be there and temperature increases uniform due
to volumetric heating principle and reduces the thermal damage nutritional losses. So, that is
relate to here, the maintaining the nutritional value of food and acceptable textural properties,minimum aroma loss and high sensor quality. So, this is also one of the main advantage when
we use Ohmic heating. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:53)
The application wise Ohmic heating  is use to for Preheating,  Blanching, Pasteurization,
Sterilization and Extraction of food products in almost all main thermal processing of food it
is a employed approved by USDA and FDA and use to commercially for pump able food so
which is nothing but In-line. it is use to for pump able food, which contains syrups including
whole fruits, fruit juices whole fruits in the sense pulps are high.
We have already seen it is, mainly employed for the food material, which has large food
chunks. And fruit juices, egg, milk etc. so all pump able fluids it is used the commercial
technologies developed in USA, Japan, UK and other several European countries, for the
pasteurization as well as aseptic packaging. The Ohmic heating is the thermal electrical
method where food is in contact with the electrodes also known as Joule heating, Electro
conductive  heating,  Electrical  resistance  heating, Direct-electrical  resistance  heating, and
Electro heating. So all name same Ohmic heating.
So, remember here there are two electrodes so the voltage is being applied in the electrodes
the food material or the liquid food, which has to be heated passing through in between in the
two electrodes. So, that is where it is told contact with the electrodes. Ohmic heating is very
often use to pasteurization / Sterilization of the fluid food product, fluid food products, pump
able fluids. In which the contact with the electrode is not a serious problem, resulting in
excellent quality.So  some  time  what  happens  certain  food  material  will  enhanced  the  corrosion  in  the
electrodes so if that is the case some of the corroded materials may also get into the food. So,
it is very much employable and gives the excellent quality then such problem is not arising.
Such problem in the sense, there should not be any corrosion in the electrodes due to the
liquid food product to be heated. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:14):
So, the electro process use for the pasteurization of a milk had been name as Electropure. The
pasteurization of milk using Ohmic heating technique is call as Electropure. And after Ohmic
heating got well established so there was drop using to the technology commercially due to
higher electricity prices and a Electrolysis- related effects.
The electrolysis in the sense, one is the electrodes the corroded and it is comes in to the food.
And sometime what happens, due to electrical heating some of the components of the food
material also get denature. Because when you are using the food in presence of electrodes
there may be a corrosion in the electrodes and those corroded material can also get in to food.
Or, otherwise due to electrolytic reactions some of the food fragment also get denatured. 
So  this  effects  are  unwanted  and  process  regulation,  there  were  no  process  regulations
employed for the Ohmic heating and there were certain technical limitations were also there.
So due to these reasons once it picked up there were no commercial plants, there were no
commercial technology. then after that with the solid-state power supply technology, it is nowpossible to use Ohmic heating in pulse mode pulse Ohmic heating to, economically control
electrolytic effects to innocuous levels. 
And ohmic system are now better engineered, more sophisticated far less expensive their
predecessors produce Ohmic heating equipment. So there was a certain dip in between but
again it got picked up due to technology advancement.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:09)
So now, we are going to see lab scale system, which is design for the Ohmic heating. So the
first one is here it is a principle system so this is the principle which the Ohmic heating
works. So here is you the processing system. So fluid in is this one and fluid out is this one.
So, AC supplies the voltage so the current is flowing through the liquid material directly. So
here is the lab scale system develop so I, have given the reference in the last slide so where
you can find this Lab scale as well as a Pilot scale system.
And in the lab scale system you have a AC supplied to give electrical energy to the system.
And there is Variac, so which controls the desired voltage, and it is given to the power
controller. So here, you have voltage as well as a current measurement unit. So this is called
Ohmic heating unit Heater tester unit. So, which is includes the sample cell as well as
electrodes. So this is the static Ohmic heater box here you have your fluid food and here you
have electrodes as well.
And we have a temperature measurement system and if you have fluid food then you may be
having flow rate control as well. And to record all the data and temperature of flow and you
will have a microcomputer system as well. And, so this is insulated completely using thepolypropylene box and two type K coated titanium plate electrodes are used. The electrodes
use to here is the titanium plate electrodes.
And  the  frequency  applied  is  50Hz  current  and  240  voltage  240  voltage  and  K  type
thermocouple with a PTFE coating is using to measure the temperature within the cell. Which
is nothing but the Ohmic cell. So PTFE is nothing but the Poly-Tetra-Floro-Ethylene. So this
coatings are use in order to avoid the corrosion when it is directly facing the fluid food
products. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:50)
So this is the pilot scale system. So, if you see over here this the feed pump so mostly
positive displacement pump. So this is your Ohmic heater column, so you have a three
different sections. So this is the all hall effect sensor. So hall effect sensor is just to measure
the voltage. So as I told already there are lot of technology improvement so even now they
were using RFID system.
RFID system is used to measure the voltage, so earlier it was using the Hall Effect Sensors.
Hall Effect is nothing but so when the magnetic field is applying to the perpendicular to the
current then you can measure the voltage across the section through which the current is
flowing. So, now they are using RFID system but, when you use the sensor depends upon
that you supposed to define column as well. 
The Hall Effect Sensor this may be metal column for example- SS metal can be use. If you
use the RFID system there may be a frequency interferences  between the stainless  still
material and RFID system so in that case you may be using the glass system. So thus is up tothe choice of the production unit whatever you wanted to use you can use but it should be
design carefully. 
Here you have three Ohmic heater column then, after that it goes to product holding tube. So,
what we have seen in the previous lectures how the inline pasteurization and sterilization are
conducted. We have a heater we have a holding tube and after that cooling section. So here
the heater column is nothing but the Ohmic heater column except that then everything else is
same so you have a product holding tubes here, and here you have a cooling sections where
your cooling water is use to cool the product. Then after, that it goes to aseptic storage or
packaging. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:05) reference slide 19:31
So heating column holding and cooling tubes and three electrodes housings, each containing
a cantilever electrode. The electrode here is cantilever electrode the electrode housings are
connect with the spacer tubes which gives to heating sections. So, if you see here then you
will understand better so this is the thing. So there are three heating sections so this is nothing
but the electrical housing so here you have the electrode. 
So, electrode so here is the spacer tube gives the two different heating sections and the
product is introduce into the system via twin piston PLC metering system. As I said earlier
this pump is on your choice so this the based on fluid product what you use for the Ohmic
heating. The pump is design to allow the fluid particle to pass through with minimal damages
and is adapted for high viscous and particulate foods. So as we told already the mainly ohmic
heating is employed for high viscous and particulate foods.
So we need to design the pump accordingly, which should allow fluid food particles to pass
through with minimal damage and the product was collected at the exit of the cooling section
and returned by means of a flexible tubes to the pump. And due to increase the electric
conductivity of the products as the heat increases, the connecting tube increase in length
throughout the system to maintain the same electrical impedance. So you must be wondering
so why you have at the connecting tubes, here right so that is the purpose here. 
So, due to increase the electric conductivity of the product as heat increases the connecting
tube so also increases in length throughout the system, to maintain the electrical impedance.
So in all section the electrical impedance should be same so this is simple same thing what
we have seen here so as I told earlier, so this system can be system in the sense the Ohmic
heater column can be design based on once own choice. So, which housing you wanted to
provide, which sensors you wanted to provide and which kind of heating column you wanted
to provide it is based on our choice. So I have given two different systems. One is the system
where you have a heating sections here and you have electrodes in between and electrode
housing is nothing but this whole set up. 
And here another one you can see so this is vertical to take care of upward flow so this is
slanting sections. So here you will find two electrodes here, and also here you have a mixer
rod will give the agitation to give the proper mixing for the fluid. So this is the product flow.
so here you will get It at the exit so other than that there is not much difference in between
them you can have a mixer of or you cannot have so it depends upon the requirement of the
industry or the requirement base on the fluid food product.(Refer Slide Time: 20:46)
The application of the Ohmic heating system can be adapted to aseptic food processing lines
so we have already told pump able fluids and temperature require for UHT processing can be
achieved using Ohmic heating. Ability to heat material rapidly so we have just a seen in the
advantages and uniformly leading to a less aggressive thermal treatment so my temperature is
not that high, and it can pasteurize the proteinous food, such as liquid egg and whey without
coagulation.
 So since my temperature is not increasing that much there is no aggressive thermal treatment
so it can pasteurize proteinous product, which may be difficult using the conventional thermal
processing technology. So, especially whey without coagulation and degradation of proteins
and fouling in the equipment surfaces during Ohmic heating is less compare to conventional
heating method. So, here due to degradation of proteins so it will not form a layer near the
electrode.
So if it forms the layer near the electrodes then may be overheating near the electrodes
because the formed layers for example so you have electrode here. So if my fluid particle
forms the fouling or scaling near the electrode so then here it will get heated fast get heated
higher rate. Why it is higher rate? Because this may not be able to move so in that case it get
heat at higher rate so this may be the problem. Degradation of the proteins and fouling in the equipment surface during Ohmic heating is less
compare to conventional heating method. So, the overheating near the heating surface is less
in Ohmic heating compare to conventional heating method. There is no need for mixing of
fluids  fluid  for  homogeneous  heating  which  important  for food sensitive  to mechanical
damage. 
So normally what are the conventional thermal processing methods available so there if I use
the agitation so you might have seen also right there are couple of lectures we have also
specifically given weightage to the agitation principle. Right so if I do the agitation so my
heat transfer will be enhance, but in the food side, this would be the disadvantage because
there are some foods, which are sensitive to mechanical damage.
 So to avoid the agitation I can also employ Ohmic heating because it gives me homogeneous
heating  without  any  agitation.  Because  it  works  on  the  principle  of  volumetric  heating
phenomenon. Energy conventional efficiencies are very high of course and small equipment
footprints and are generally quiet. And, it will not make any noise due to thermal stresses and
Instant on off his possible. If you have seen somewhere in a previous lecture that come up
with time.
So once I switch on so how long it takes to heat the container and heat the food so that can be
avoided here because it is an instant on  off and also system can be shut down instantly. If any
problem occurs and accurate temperature control is possible using proper process control
system. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:21)
And, the issues wise, we need to take care of proper electrical insulations and accurate
process control system. So, when I was mentioning here itself I told where the accurate
temperature control is possible only when, if you use to accurate process control system. And
Well-trained (person are) personnel are needed and Toxicological and Mutagenic substances
production. So, this is the area which not much explode. 
As, I say already told, so there may be possibility for electrolysis as well as the corrosion of
electrodes. And which is directly because of we are heating food products directly using the
electrodes. So, there may be transfer of Toxicological as well as Mutagenic substance which
goes in to food. And precise information on assurance of its lethality in various kind of foods
is also area which needs to be explode in terms of Ohmic heating. 
Because the property of the food is extensively affects the Ohmic heating we will see in
subsequent slides  so why it so. And installation  cost are very high we told in all non-
conventional thermal processing technologies but processing cost is almost comparable with
any of the thermal processing technology. And presence of non-conductive parts are some
components such as fat globules.
 So if it there so it is electrical conductivity is very less. So if your food products contain the
fat globule, what happens is that particulate place will not be heated much. So if it is not
heated much there will not be contamination, local contamination. So this is the serious issue
in ohmic heating. So presence of non-conductive parts. And temperature increases highly
rapid and uncontrollable. It crerates the possibility of runaway heating. 
So this is also important because, the time verses electrical conductivity that relation is
almost linear relationship BT1 plus C. So B and C are constants. So almost the temperature
increases linearly with the electrical conductivity. So in that case if it increases the rapidly, so
it becomes uncontrollable then there is a possibility of runaway heating. 
So, that is also one of the issue of Ohmic heating. And development of adequate heating
safety and quality- assurance of protocols in order to obtain an approved filing of the process
with the FDA for all possible food materials. So this is very much Important it is not only true
for Ohmic heating per any process for any food processing technology. So we need to take
care of the safety and quality assurance protocols because it is of public health significance.
So this is true for almost non-thermal or thermal technologies. So which are going to be
applied commercially. (Refer Slide Time: 27:40)
And what are all the main process control parameters to be consider in Ohmic heating Is the
voltage gradient, what we applied the frequency and the temperature range and the Electrical
conductivity  differences  and  the  electrode  type.So  this  is  the  on  the  electrical  system
parameters. And voltage current and power applied across the electrode. And the current
density, Current density is nothing but the ampere per meter square which is nothing but a
current upon area. 
So this is another critical parameters which is to be consider in the Ohmic heating. And flow
properties in the pumping system, because it is use to for pump able foods so we need to take
care of the flow properties. Because the for example the mass flow rate is a main critical
factor. And which type of food material we use. So one of the lectures I mention about the
Newtonian and Non-Newtonian.
And also, which type of flow we are encountering for example, laminar or turbulent so that is
also matters. So all this  to be taken care. And the fruit and the vegetable  products for
example- juices, purees and pules are also, successfully Ohmiccaly heated. Their high heating
rates, which are dependent on the voltage gradient applied. Provide the opportunity to blanch
or pasteurize them quickly and uniformly compared to conventional thermal technologies.(Refer slide time: 29:18)
 
So one of them main parameter how we have solid conventional thermal processing of solid
foods thermal conductivity was the main parameters and in terms of liquid food products,
And in terms of liquid food products the heat transfer coefficient so here in Ohmic heating
the electrical conductivity is the critical factor. So it depends upon the ionic breakup and the
microstructure of the food material undergoing heating. So if you remember the current
which is flowing through the food is nothing but a flow of electrons. So how much it depends
upon  the  ionic  breakup  as  well  as  the  microstructure  of  the  food  material,  which  is
undergoing heating. 
For example If I have heating food product which has a sugar as well as the fat globules may
influence  the  electric  conductivity  of  the  sample  depending  on  their  electrolytic
characteristics. For examples for sugar and fat globules so my electrolytic characteristics may
be different. So based on that only it shows up the electrical conductivity when voltage has
applied between the electrodes. In fruit juices, the main solute component is the sugar which
is having a non-electrode behavior but, the possibility of the juices enhanced there electrical
conductivity.For example, sugar has non-electrolytic behavior but, that will be compensated if your juices
having acidity in nature. Because the acidity in nature enhanced the electrical conductivity.
So, basically it is an example. So, you cannot determine or you cannot generalize the food
material by saying wherever the sugar component is there. So, it will have non-electrolytic
behavior so it also depend on the other component of the food material for example if the
sugar and acidity contents both are there.
So the non-electrolytic behavior of the sugar can be compensate using the acidity of the fruit
juice. Electrical conductivity is of fruit and vegetable juices increase linearly by decreasing
the insoluble solid contents. So if there are high amount of insoluable solid contents then you
were electrical conductivity may be reduced. So decrease in electrical conductivities occurs
after bubbling starts. Actually, this bubbling is the phenomenon when you have a water so
there may be a bubbling phenomenon. So we are going to see this in next slide. So if that is
bubbling is occurs there may a decreasing electrical conductivity. 
(Refer slide time: 31:56)
So, this is the table which talks about the different fruit, food and the temperature ranges.
And the voltage gradient applied across the electrode and the concentration range in the food
material and electrical conductivity. So this you can get in the reference itself. For example I
will just would like to highlight few. Orange juice the temperature range is 25-80 and 30-60. And the voltage gradient applied is
42.42 voltage per cm and if it a temperature ranges between 30-60, then you suppose to
applies 20-60 voltage per cm. And also it is depend on the mass fraction. So here you have a
0-20% solid contents here, 0.2-0.6 mass fraction. And also the electrical conductivity is high
in terms of when you apply 42.42 volts per cm. It contain 21% solids but if you 0.2 to 0.6
mass fraction. So your electrical conductivity is decreased 0.15 to 1.15 semens per meter. So,
you can see such kind of the tables in reference material given. 
(Refer slide time: 33:16):
So  the  next  important  parameter  is  temperature  we  have  seen  about  the  electrical
conductivity. Because the Ohmic heat to Ohmic heating to applied the food material should
have electrical conductivity so that what is we have seen so the second one is the temperature
The change in the temperature during Ohmic heating is very fast we have just a seen and
could resultant run away heating. And in continuous system the power applied during heating
cam be adjusted by using feedback or feed-forward control this is very much important.
Because if it heats rapidly there may be a runaway heating. Measurements of temperature
mass flow rate and specific heat capacity. 
As I told in previous slide the temperature mass flow rate as well as specific heat capacity
changes during Ohmic heating should be measure then and there to have a precise control of
the system. In, back system the temperature measurement taken from the different points of
the food help the observation of the maximum temperature limit. And associate the on off thepower supply in the back system we employ the thermocouple and get the temperature
measurements. 
Then and their using the digital display so if we feel it goes to the maximum temperature
limit then we can switch of the power supply. And electrical insulation temperature probe is
used is important in avoiding undesired signal disturbance in the measurement system. So
what we are using is, electrical energy to heat the flood in such case the temperature probe
what we use also should be insulated properly otherwise it will have an undesired signal
disturbance.
Because this is also electrical and that is also electrical so it is signal disturbance would be
there. So insulation of the electric probe whatever we use for the temperature measurement
should be insulate properly.
(Refer Slide Time: 35:16)
And a since the Ohmic heating in second for high-acidity fluid foods, the sensitivity of the
temperature probes should be high and response  times should be low enough. So this is also
another important criteria where we are use thermocouple to measure the temperature inside
the  food  material.  Because  the  probe  should  be  high,  that  is  nothing  but  a  sensitivity.
Sensitivity is how fast it measure the temperature and give the digital display.
 Right and also there are ((35:49)) for example if I keep the thermocouple how fast it respond
to the temperature difference and how fast I will be able to get that the data recorder. This two
are important parameters and specially coated T-type thermocouple have been use in severalstudies for the purpose of temperature measurement during Ohmic heating. So that T-type
thermocouple so this the same thermocouple we have seen to be used in variation purpose
also right so validation temperature distribution test. 
So there also be use the T-type  thermocouple  and  one more the  picking  up the  recent
technology is non-invasive. Non-invasive is in the sense, the both are electrical systems
thermocouple whatever the thermocouple we get in terms of distance signals right so since
both are involving the electrical signals there may be a disturbance so due to which the non-
invasive temperature mapping techniques were developed.
So  such  as  magnetic  resonance  imaging  which  allows  the  production  of  two-or  three-
dimensional temperature map of Ohmically heated food Materials without disconnecting the
electrical  heating  power and also allows  the estimation  of fluid-particulate  heat transfer
coefficient for food mixtures in the Ohmic heater during the holding period . So, this is what
they do is they employ the magnetic particle so which nothing but a traced particle. 
So this is use as a traced particle to measure the temperature inside the holding tube. So this
also will be sent with along the fl and it is further use to for a temperature measurements. So
this  helps  me  as  alternative  to  the  normal  conventional  thermocouple  temperature
thermocouple measurement system.
(Refer Slide Time: 37:47) 
 And another important critical factor is that electrochemical reaction the contamination of
food  with  a  metal  ions  migrated  from  the  electrodes  and  the  resulting  electrochemical
reaction  products.  So  this  is  the  critical  thing  when  we  use  the  Ohmic  heating  so  the
contamination  of  the  food  by  the  metal  ions  migrated  from  the  electrodes  so  this
contamination of the food by the metal ions migrated from the electrodes.
 So this contamination could be either toxic which is nothing but a (carcinogenic) or being
undesired taste and coloring to processed food. That is another problem while most of the
consumer not prefer electrically heated food. The better electrode materials or by operational
high frequency so we can avoid such electrochemical reactions in the electrodes and use of
surface electrodes with a lower corrosion tendency so that is nothing but titanium, gold so if
you see in our pilot scale so here we use a two type K coated titanium plate electrode.
So  that  is  to  avoid  the  corrosion  are  electrochemical  reactions.  So  normally  the  lower
corrosion tendency materials which is nothing, but the titanium or gold is used or the coating
of the existing surface with the less corroding materials may be also an option platinized
titanium.  So  this  also  can  be  used  and  pulsed  to  Ohmic  heating  is  another  option  for
minimizing the electrochemical reactions and the formation of gas bubbles during Ohmic
heating. So the formation of gas bubbles as well as the minimizing electrochemical reactions
can be taken care by the pulse  to Ohmic heating. So pulse Ohmic heating I suppose to use
one more pulse generator to create the current(Refer Slide Time: 39:34)
 So the gas bubble so we have seen if there is a bubbling, there may be a reduction in the
electrical conductivity right, this gas bubbles where from there are coming, so are the results
of either water boiling due to localize high current densities or the by-product of various
oxidation and reduction reactions for example .H2 or O2 gas. So due to which also there may
be a bubble formation or naturally the water boiling also creates the bubble formation.
So whatever be but it is undesired in the Ohmic heating if the air is occluded in the sample,
air bubbles expanded with the temperature with the pressure remaining constant. So this is
also a problem so it is starts growing and it collapse with each other. So that is also a problem
and the electrolytic reactions were not evident with specifically coated electrodes or in the
use of high frequency power. So this we have seen here as well either I need to use better
electrode materials or by operation at higher frequency. 
So ph is an  another important factor in the electrode corrosion and the electrolytic reaction so
this is very much important ph and temperature which also enhance the electrode corrosion.
And electrolytic reactions, So this is just to give two examples so we cannot generalized
anything here. So that is what I wanted to tell you this the pulse ohmic heating at higher
frequencies that is what we have told. (Refer Slide Time: 41:11)  
Right, so if we take care of higher frequency then the electrode reactions may be avoided so
pulse Ohmic heating at higher frequencies and shorter pulse width yielded the lowest rates of
electrochemical reactions for stainless steel electrodes. But, pulse Ohmic heating at lower
frequency and longer pulse width was more effective in suppressing the electrochemical
reactions of titanium as well as platinized-titanium electrodes. 
So we cannot generalized but optimum value should be found out, optimum value should be
found out based on the food material and electrode. So we cannot generalized. So in general
that is the case means the better electrode materials at a higher frequencies will avoid the
electrochemical reactions but certain food material should not be true as well. There are
exceptional cases alwaysss(Refer Slide Time: 42:22)
And, the food properties which are also very much important when we apply the ohmic
heating the acidity so we have already seen acidity increase the electrical conductivity. The
composition of the food material for example we have told if my fluid food has the fat
globules so then it shows the non-electric behavior. So because of that there may be cold spot
in the food material.
So, because which it cannot conduct the electricity in that as it may not get heated to the
optimum level so there may be cold spot in the food material Rheological properties as
example, I have told you right Newtonian and Non-Newtonian food. So Non-Newtonian food
there are two important criteria so we need to take care, one is flow consistency another one
is flow behavior. 
So in one of the lectures also we have told right most of the food materials are behaving with
the Non-Newtonian food behavior so this two important parameters we suppose to consider
so that is where the Rheological properties of the food is very much important for the Ohmic
heating. And total solid content one of the point is we have seen if we increase the solid
contents there may be s reduction the electric conductivity.
And the viscosity of the liquid food this is also related to the rheological property behavior if
the food is in the form of solid liquid mixture so I we need to take care of the particle
dimension. Because it is pump able fluid and need to employ the pump also based on the
characteristics of the flood product what we used.And  the  orientation  and  the  density  of  the  solids  in  the  liquid  mixture  and  electrical
conductivity ratios of the solid and liquid so this is the very much important because when
you have a liquid as well as the solid particle in the thermal processing technology we might
have told the heat transfer coefficient. And the thermal conductivity of the solid material
should be far match otherwise the convection may be very fast and conduction will be very
slow. 
Then in such case we have the overheating at the surfaces the same thing here when we use
the solid particulate in the liquid the electrical conductivity ratios between the solid and liquid
is also very much important when we employ Ohmic heating. The difference between the
electrical conductivity and specific heats of the solid and the liquid phases in the mixture will
extensively affect the temperature distribution in the Ohmic heating column so this is the
difference  between the electrical  conductivity  and specific  heats  of the solid and liquid
phases.
So this we have seen in the previous slide itself so how it effects the Ohmic heating. The
physical and the electrical properties of the food should be known and take into account. In
the design procedure so this is very much important. The electrical properties as well as the
physical properties which is nothing but the density, dimension etc. also to be taken care
when we use the design procedure 
(Refer slide time: 45:44)  
So then, there are Flow Properties. Flow properties in the sense, I have already mention so we
suppose to know which type of flow it is encountering whether laminar or transition or
turbulent. And also important thing is the Newtonian and Non-Newtonian. So When we use
such a cases I have also mention. So, for example you have electrode here so based on the
flow consistency intakes here what means to be happen is the flood layer which is next to the
electrodes.
So will not move fasters in that case it may get heated at higher case and it will cost the
overcooking or over processing so this can be avoid at if we know the flow properties inside
the Ohmic heating column well. So one such technique is this is nothing but a PIV technique
so which is use to see the local velocity variations inside the cell so this technique uses image
processing to get to know the velocity. So this is normal computer system so this is CCD
camera. So which has higher pixel rate as well as pulse seconds how many shorts it can take
also it is very much higher so this is the high end camera. 
So this is the computer system so this is the synchronizer. So this lesser so this is lens so this
is the laser light, this is the test cell, which is having proper high thickness and width. And
this is the flow controller this is pump so this is the tank from here fluid is pumped and the
using the flow controller it goes to test cell and it come to the back. So here we are using it
we are using the lesser light so this test cell also has carrier particle so as I told earlier so this
is my fluid I also employ the tracer particle in the fluid material. 
So what happens is this lesser light so follow the tracer particle so which is called a tracer
particle so this is also moves in per with the fluid velocity. Right so this lesser light or get the
tracer particles so this  is taken as the image using the CCD camera then it is image processed
and we will get to know what is the power input. So what happen is I employ the lesser light
in to the teste cell the test cell also contain the tracer particle, so the tracer particle movement
will be also capture by the camera. 
Then after that, eye image process and get to know the velocity of the tracer particle so the
velocity of the tracer particle is nothing but the liquid velocity. So if I know the localized
liquid velocity then I may get an idea about the distribution of the temperature inside the test
cell. (Refer Slide Time: 50:06)
Right, so for example how it can be modeled this we already know the continuity equation in
any system so this is grad dot Rho V. Right so this is the density this is the fluid density
which is the kg per meter cube So this is the time with respect to time. So this is nothing but a
density to the velocity v is nothing but the velocity vector. So if you write the same principle
using the Ohmic heating Dow Rho c upon do t this is nothing but the current density here. 
So plus grad sigma grad v. so this is sigma nothing but a electrical conductivity which is in
siemens per meter and this v is nothing but a electrical potential s it is nothing but a voltage
which here. So this is in ampere per meter cube so if we combine the Ohmic heating principle
with the continuity equation so this is the equation which is equal to the zero so at steady sate
there is no time dependency. so I can say grade sigma grade v which is equal in to zero.
 So some from this I, can calculate the heat generation rate. So which is nothing but a
volumetric heat generation. Volumetric heat generation rate, so which is equivalent to grad v
square into sigma. So this further u dot is taken into account so when we use a normal energy
balance equation so normal energy balance equation for the solid food K grad T which is
equal in to rho cp dow t upon t so here you will take the heat generation as well. This is the
heat generation rate. (Refer slide time: 52:40)
So get to know this for liquid food so we suppose to get the localized velocity. So this will
give me how the temperature because in conventional system so your temperature alters your
velocity and velocity alters to your temperature. So this would give me localized velocity
from that I can model the system better. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 53:03)
So normal thermal processing will have only this component. but, here you have a volumetric
heat generation so that can be relate to the Ohmic heating principle using this equation. 
So you can refer this further this further references and additional resources so I have taken
the tables from the particular reference so you may like to refer more for further in depth
knowledge about the electrical conductivity and how much voltage difference to be applied
electrode based on the food products. Thank You.        