Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
Lecture 17
Overview of Non-Thermal Processing Technologies
(Refer Slide Time: 0:42)
Today we are going to see about overview of non-thermal processing technologies. The
outline goes like this, the high hydrostatic pressure technology, pulsed UV light technology,
pulsed electric field technology and high voltage or discharge technology, cold plasma and
ultra sound. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:54)
The introduction about non thermal processing technologies. So, they are mainly employed to
ensure the sensory quality and nutrient values of food, by employing short processing times
and low temperature conditions. So, the movement I say what we have discuss in thermal
technologies, that time temperature combination would be very much important. So, this time
temperature combination is very much important to maintain the lethality for to deactivate
enzymes.  Which  spoils  the  food  and  also  the  keeling  of  pathogenic  and  spoilage
microorganisms. 
So, most of the thermal technologies so we apply this time temperature combination for this
purpose.  So,  what  happens  is  because  we  are  always  concern  about  the  killing  of
microorganisms.  Sometimes  my  food  may  get  over  cooked.  So,  when  in  the  process
establishment we have also seen. So, i supposed to find the equivalent F value. So, that means
even if the wealthy processes ENF to ensure the safety. So, for all safety purposes i would go
for extra three or 2D mode. 
So, that means though it is said that wealthy processes is safe. So, normally industries would
apply more than that may be 16D process. So, the disadvantage of that is what happens is
when you go for such a safer value. Sometimes, your food gets over cooked and your nutrient
values will go for from the food. So, to ensure this sensory quality and nutrient values we
thought about that how to do it with lower temperature conditions in shorter processing time.
So, that my food will get a fresh look it should not cooked or over cooked. 
So, that is the way this non thermal technologies are emerged with that motivation, and still
be  used  to  enhance  the  food  safety  so, that  they  are  talking  about.  Even  though  i  am
employing lower temperature and shorter processing time. I will ensure the required log
reduction in terms of microorganisms. And that way i will extend the shelf life of the food.
And also the non-thermal technologies could inhibit the activity of enzymes in the food. Such
as lipoxygenase and polyphenoloxidase and peroxidase and pectin esterase. 
So, this are all enzymes which indirectly or directly favors the oxidization reaction for an
example if you see here. So, it catalyze the oxidization of poly unsaturated fatty acids and
lipids. So, these technologies will inhabit this kind of activities of the enzymes as well. So,
this is also oxidize this polyphenoloxidase this peroxidase so this non thermal technologies
here inhibit  the oxidation  of hydrogen peroxide.  And, this  is pectin  esterase so all  this
enzymes activity also get inhibited when we use non thermal technologies. So, we have understood the mechanism how it happens during thermal technologies. We told
that most of the nutrient reduction or the log reduction of microorganisms follow the first
order kinetics. So, the kinetics involves temperatures and time combination. But, here I am
not using that higher temperature. So, that it means if it is not a function of temperature then
by which mechanism my log reduction of organisms happens. So, that is by changing the cell
membrane structure to remove the regulatory function of the microorganism.
So, for the regulatory function of the microorganisms the essential thing is the membrane
structure. So, I will alter the membrane structures so that some of the regulatory function in
the microorganisms get changed. So, that way microorganisms gets killed and another one is
destroying  the  genetic  materials.  So,  genetic  materials  here  is  DNA or  RNA to  caused
metabolic disorders in the microorganism. This two are the principles behind the killing of
microorganisms in non-thermal technologies.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:09)
We have just seen the thermal technologies, the disadvantages undesirable changes both in
the nutritional and in the sensorial properties of the food. Sometimes, if it gets over cooked I
do not feel the taste as well. And, it is sometimes the textures is not pleasing to have that
food.  So,  this  two  are  main  disadvantages  when  using  the  thermal  technologies.  The
increased consumer interest in high quality food with higher nutrient and fresh like sensory
attributes. You will get this in thermal technologies as well. But, mainly it is done for high nutritive value and fresh like sensory attributes. Which led to
the  development  of  a  number  of  non-thermal  processing  technologies  alternative  to
conventional heat treatments. So, the first one we have already seen in outline which is
nothing but a high hydro-static pressure. Which has the potential to improve the energy
efficiency and sustainability of the food production. And, pulsed electric field technology
which is also a non-thermal technology. 
Which provides minimally processed safe nutritious and fresh like foods. And commercially
applied for preservation of liquid foods. This P of mainly applied for liquid foods or as pre
step for solid food processes such as drying or extraction. So, before going for this solid food
processing technologies PEF is applied.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:40)
And, other one what we have seen in the outline is high voltage or discharge and cold plasma.
So, this are also proposed as alternative to conventional thermal processing treatments. And,
HVAD  consists  in  application  of  electricity  to  pasteurize  fluids  by  rapidly  discharging
electricity  through electrode  gap. So, you have two electrodes  in between your fluid is
flowing, so you apply the electricity by which the electrical charge is conducted to the fluid. 
So,  in  that  way  it  kills  the  microorganisms  generating  intense  waves  an  electrolysis,
electrolysis means the lithic of the components. So, that means you are breaking down the
components their by inactivating the microorganisms unsuitable largely. Because, electrolysis
and the formation of highly reactive chemicals occurs during the discharge. So, the mainlythe electrolysis happen in the microorganisms and they get killed, the same is applicable for
food as well. For example how we compared in the thermal technologies  though, I am
applying a high temperature microorganism gets killed at the same time my nutrient quality
also get affected. 
The same way in if you are using HVAD that is nothing but an arc discharge it is not only
killing the microorganisms it also promotes the electrolysis in the food products. So, that is
nothing  but  a  liquid  food  products  when  I  am  pasteurizing.  So,  what  happens  when
electrolysis  happens  in  the  food  there  may  be  highly  reactive  chemical  formation  or
sometimes the nutrients also forms a free radicals. So, that is unwanted thing in the HVAD
process. Effectiveness of plasmas for killing the microorganisms is well established. 
However, nutritional and chemical changes in plasma treated food are required to accurately
access the effect of plasma treatment on product quality. Actually, in all five whatever we are
going to discuss today in the class. We will have disadvantage because, the mechanism of the
microorganism get killed is not clear cut. So, no one told this is what happened in that. There
may be a theories different theories so it is proposed but, there is no confirmation. 
So, this is the correct mechanism which is happening in that non thermal technologies for that
the literatures were very limited. So, it is not well established that is what it is said, it is not
that it is established it is not well established. And, also when such kind of the free radical
formation we need to be extra careful. Because, the food is to be consumed so, we do not
want any extra by product formation or any electrolysis happens during the food processing.
And, shelf life and to confirm that no harmful by products are generated. So, this is what I
taught so we need to ensure when we apply non thermal technologies. (Refer Slide Time: 10:49)
So, this is the main disadvantages often, technically difficult to apply into the production
practice. Because, very few studies are their confirming their food safety. And, they are
expensive because, the electric discharge or cold plasma are if, you see the high hydrostatic
pressure everything is high pressure to maintain high pressure high temperature equipment
and training the personal it is very much difficult. And, consumer acceptance and safety
issues. 
The movement you say, i am using the electricity for processing then we are also safe tic
about. Whether any by product produce during the non-thermal processing or not so the
consumer acceptance also one of the main criteria and few resources and limited expertise to
develop  and  implement  novel  emerging  technologies.  This  also  stops  the  non-thermal
technologies widely applied in the industry.(Refer Slide Time: 11:48)
The first two technic is high hydro static pressure technic. So, this is applied for preservation
of wide range of foods meat, fish, seafood, dairy and vegetable products, ready to eat meals.
But, also for some fermented products such as beer or wine. So, all this technology is among
non-thermal technologies this technology is well establish and some of the industry also
adopted it. And, the pressure acts mostly instantaneously and uniformly in all points of the
food.
Which mean that no matter the food shape or size effect the pressure and the pressure is
evenly distributed according to Pascal law. So, what it means is so, if you see the pressure
concept so the pressure increases with respect to depth. And, if see in at particular height the
pressure is evenly distributed. So, that we call it as a hydrostatic equilibrium. At certain
height the pressure is equally distributed, it does not matter which size which shape of the
food is their so that is nothing but a Pascal law. 
So, with this principle only high hydrostatic pressure technology works. So, the pressure
range we apply here in the is 300 to 800 mega Pascal. The mild temperature range is 5 to 35
remember this is when we apply initially. So, due adiabatic heating because the chamber is
close to chamber during processing it may rise up to 55 degree centigrade due to adiabatic
heating. Adiabatic heating is without heat transfer to the environment the heat is builded up
within the chamber. So, that is nothing but adiabatic heating. So, due to which the temperature may increase up to 50 degree, combined with different time
periods in general minutes that should result in an inactivation of microorganisms. So, that
this  pressure  and  temperature  combination  with  certain  period  will  take  care  of  the
inactivation of the microorganisms. The microorganisms inactivation mechanism with HHP
takes  place  at  low  energy  and  does  not  promote  the  formation  of  unwanted  chemical
components, or free radicals that can result when food is irradiated. 
If you see pulsed UV light or pulsed electric field. So, there is a irradiation of energy is
involved. But, that is not here in the HHP process so, that means there is no formation of
unwanted chemical components is there compare to other irradiation technologies.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:34)
So, this is the basic diagram so what happens is this is your closed pressure chamber. So, here
is your food material is there. So, this is a sample support so using the pressure pump the
water is pressurized inside the chamber. So, ones the required level of pressure for example
so, if you are doing it with some 700 MPA. So, ones the 700 MPA pressure is reached so, this
is the pump is stop. So, then we already told it this is the certain time period. It is kept so, that
means the 700 pressure is applied equally on the food material. So, that is nothing but, due to Pascal law which is nothing but, a hydro static equilibrium.
Then ones this time period after keeping it in this particular time period. So, using the water
release wall this is decompressed. Decompressed in the sense depressurized the chamber is
depressurized. And this is a heating and cooling medium this is a jacket around the chamber.
So, that is the way this hydrostatic pressure works. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:47)
So, many process happening simultaneously  but or not completely  known. What is this
process this process they tell in term of killing of microorganisms. So, as I told there is no
clear cut definition by which this mechanism only my killing of microorganism happens there
is no well established theory for that. So, it happens due to alteration of cell membrane.
Denaturation of proteins which includes enzymes as well and the changes cell morphology.
Which are thought to be a primary reasons for microorganisms damage. 
And, it is not like one particular principle. High pressure alters the membrane permeability
and causes leakage via internal and external membranes, which has been proved by increased
sensitivity of the cells to sodium chloride and bile salts, and leakage of ATP after HHP
treatment. So, after the HHP treatment the products were analyzed and it was well understood
that  the  components  which  has  to  be  inside  the  cell  membrane  where  out  of  the  cell
membrane.And the products whatever there in the outside of the cell membrane were also went inside.
So, that means the membrane permeability got changed. So, the membrane permeability
normally what happens it permeates certain components not certain components. So, when
this got changed we do not know we are not sure what are all the inside components came out
of the membrane. And, what are all outside components went into the membranes. And, also
it was proved that the cells are sensitive to any cells also. 
That means so, there may be some compositional changes and also the ATP Adenosine Tri-
Phosphate. So, that was found in the sample after HHP treatment. So, that means the leakage
happened through the cell membrane. HHP can denature protein structure and corresponding
enzyme activity. So, these were the theory proposed after HHP treatment by which the
microorganisms get damaged.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:05)
In addition, HHP causes changes of morphology and inner organization in cells. That we have
seen and the altered the distribution at degradation of DNA and the destruction of ribosome
have been found after the HHP treatment. And, many vegetative bacteria including spoilage
and  pathogenic  microorganisms,  yeasts,  molds  and  viruses,  are  sensitive  to  HHP. And
however, it should be noticed that the spores are very resistive to HHP even in the thermal
technology we have seen. So, most of the thermal technologies were able to handle the vegetative forms of the spoilage
as well as pathogenic organisms. But, very few thermal technologies only able to kill the
spores form of the microorganisms. The same thing is applied for HHP as well. So it is told
that so many vegetative bacteria. 
Which includes spoilage as well as pathogenic and yeast mole viruses get killed but, it is
noted that the spores of clostridium botulinum can still survive. This is just we discuss in
many classes. under extreme conditions of 827 mega Pascal for above 30 minute at 75
degree. Even applying this high pressure and high temperature for about 30 minute Which is
also nothing but a high time the spores of clostridium botulinum did not get killed.
It has been demonstrated that the gram positive bacteria or cells in stationary growth phase
tend to be more resistance to high pressure. So, this is gram positive bacteria if your food is
prompt to gram positive bacteria or cells then this technology may not work better. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:01)
600 mega Pascal pressure is the threshold value and also is considered to be economical and
microbiologically  safe  for  achieving  the  pasteurization  level.  If  it  is  combined  with
temperatures in the range of 35 to 55 degree. So, 35 to 55 degree and 600 mega Pascal
pressure is enough to pasteurize the food which are micro biologically safe. The critical
factors are pressure level, time at pressure, time to achieve treatment pressure, adiabatic
heating is i have told and decompression time. So, after the process finished how much time I am taking for decompression and treatment
temperature, products initial temperature, pH, water activity, and composition of the product
packaging materials this is very much important criteria. Because, when you are applying the
high pressure then you need to take the pouch materials or pouched packed materials. And, it
should withstand that high pressure the packaging materials should be stand the high pressure
processing. And, extrinsic fact is prior to processing, and during storage and distribution. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:09)
HHP has the potential to produce, high quality foods and display characteristics of fresh
products and are microbiologically safe. Important advantage is nothing but, it is subjected to
high pressure with or without packaging. So, both way we use but which in former case
eliminates the possibility of post treatment contamination. So, whatever the thermal non
thermal  technologies  we say we failed  it thermal  technologies  where based in terms  of
microbial damage because, the mechanism is well understood. 
But, here what they wanted to tell is when you are subjecting a high pressure it may be done
with or without packaging but if you do it with packaging. The post treatment contamination
we can better avoid when pressure treatment alone is often not sufficient for substantial
reduction of viable spore counts this we have seen, So as some spores of some species see
but, were found to survive up to 1200 mega Pascal at room temperature. So, in that case the
some of the species spores can survive up to 1200 mega Pascal at room temperature. So, this only HHP may not be micro biologically safe. So, in that case we also combine
temperature as well as the pressure process so, combining pressure processing other hurdle
have  been  suggested in that  case,  in case of temperature  as  well  as  pressure  both and
increasing exposure time. But, also we have seen in the previous slide even if you apply 827
mega Pascal 30 min at 75 still spores of clostridium botulinum survive. 
So, that were it is told either increase both pressure and temperature are increase exposure
time are high pressure in low pH environment so this we have seen. So, pH environment are
micro biologically same combination with some antimicrobial agents. So, that also it may be
tried along with high pressure processing along with high pressure you increase temperature
as well or go for increment in exposure pressure or lower the pH or add some outside
antimicrobial agents.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:31)
Simultaneous  application  of high pressure and high temperature  treatments  can  produce
undesirable effects. So we told the solution here the increase of temperature and pressure.
But, what is the disadvantage again lose the barrier to oxygen. And delamination phenomena
in the sense so, you have a packaging material so, when you apply high pressure and high
temperature there may be a farming layer. For example, if the some crack will be the so, you
will the different layers of that. So, that is nothing but a delamination and unacceptable modifications in the integrity of
packaging  structure  that  also  happens.  And,  selection  and  optimization  of  packaging
structures for HHP processing are of extreme importance. I have just mentioned that in terms
of correct processing, shelf life, enhancement, economy, marketing, logistics and distribution.
So, for this one thing I would like to take example from that there was some case study in
some of food industry. 
When  there  were  storing  after  the  particular  thermal  processing  they  formed  this
contamination. So, in the contamination they supposed to throw that particular batch but still. 
When they were inspecting what was the reason for contamination. So, they found that in the
pouch when there were sealing it there is some one particular hole, due to sealing mission
rearrangement. So, for example while sealing the packet there were another line another extra
line happened. Due to which there is some damaged happen during the sealing. 
So, through which the contamination happened so, that is what here it is mentioned. So it is
the packaging structure of is of very much essential when you apply HHP because, even in
the sterilization. We have told that when you switch over from heating to cooling if, there are
pouches there will be a pressure in balance in inside the pouch material and outside the
pouched material. So, to common site we used compressed air over to give the cushion effect.
So, here also we are applying a high pressure. So, we need to be extra careful about the
packing structure. And, important draw back of the HHP at present time is the cost of this
technology due to high pressure processing. We need to take care of all the control when, we
apply the high pressure. This process should not be confused with hydrodynamic pressure
process. (Refer Slide Time: 26:04)
So, this is another process so actually high hydrostatic refers to the liquids and the pressure in
a liquid or exerted by a liquid in immersed object. So, that means this HHP technology will
be used for static mode in the sense if you see. So, you have a food particle here around
which water is there at high pressure or this comes under the submerged object under liquid.
So, either it will applied to pure liquid if the food is liquid products then the pressure is
applied on the liquid or, if it is a solid product so you are using the submerged object in
within the liquid.
So, based on this two mechanism HHP works. But, hydrodynamics refers to the flow of fluid
and the force acting on solid bodies immersed in these fluids. So, when the fluid is in motion
it is called as high hydrodynamics pressure technology. HDP is normal technology used to
extend the shelf life of meat products in particular for tenderizing meat using shock waves
from  the  underwater  detonation  of  explosive  material.  So,  this  detonation  of  explosive
material when it is under water it creates a shock waves. 
So, this pressure of shock waves is use to process the meat products in HDP technology. The
effects of HDP treatment on further process meat product or not fully understood. Additional
studies on processed meat products of various textures are necessary to determine the effect
of HDP. So, this mechanism is not well established so, HDP treatment is at its initial stage.(Refer Slide Time: 27:50)
The second one is pulsed UV light so here what we are going to use is in the white light of
spectral band 200 to 280 nanometer. So, this range of spectral band from the white light we
use as a UV light to inactivate the surface microorganisms using short pulses and of an
intense broad spectrum. So, short pulses in the sense. For example so you have a wave so this
is time so, how my pulses go with respect to time so, at particular time how much intensity of
pulses is being applied on the particular food product. 
So that is what it is called as pulsed, pulses with respect to time. Each pulse are flash of light
lasts only a few hundred million or thousands of a second. But the intensity of each flash light
is 20000 times that of sunlight at sea level which contain some ultraviolet light as well. So, it
is applied on specific time. But, the intensity of this UV light is 20000 times what we seen in
sunlight at normal sea level. The deoxyribonucleic acid which is nothing but a DNA in the
cells observes this UV light to form photoproducts in DNA
Which interrupts the both DNA transcription and translation and then leads to the cell death.
This  is  not  very  common  in  the  DNA  transcription  and  translation  in  the  normal
microorganism regulatory function. But, the movement the microorganism sees the UV light
it starts absorbing for its photo product synthesis. So, that way this transcription as well as
translation of DNA gets changed so, that is where the cell death happens. So, what are all
needed so, by name itself you have might have understood. I need one pulse generator treatment pulse generator which is nothing but a timing control
and trigger generator. Pulse generator you need so to power this you need a power unit of
high pressure electrical pulses and also the treatment chamber to transform the light sources
to high power light pulses. So the treatment chamber as well as the pulse generator and the
power unit to power all the units and timing control and trigger generator. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:17)
So, this is basic diagram so here you have a power supply. So, it is given to energy capacitor
unit. So this is given to flash lamp mostly xenon lamps. You have a reflector over here it is a
stainless steel most of the time. So, what it function is to trap the UV light inside the chamber
inside the treatment chamber. Here, is your sample and this the sample shelf so which has the
vertical regulatory mechanism. So, that this distance between the pulses created from the
source and the food particle is very much important. 
So, this vertical regulatory mechanism helps in that. For example if I have to maintain 5
centimeter where the sample shelf should be or, if I have to maintain 2 centimeter there the
size of the sample should be. So, by that we can also regulate he intensity of the pulse. And
this is another way of treating the food using UV light. So, this is lamps so from which your
UV light is coming up so this is the shelf, this is the target food product or food sample. You have a time indicator here and time setting button and power switch and power system.
What happens is photo chemical, photo physical, photo thermal. Photo thermal in the sense
you normally you know when you have lamp it is on for certain time. So, if you touch it, it
will be hot. So that is nothing but photo thermal effect due to this UV pulses. The food also
get heated to certain extend and photo chemical. 
We just have discussed the DNA absorbs the UV light and it synthesis the photo product.
And, photo physical is sometimes when the UV light is observed by the DNA there may be a
changes in the cell membrane activities. Cell rupture also can at a so that is nothing but photo
physical mechanism. 
(Refer Slide Time: 32:17)
Pulsed UV light  which has 200 to 600 nanometer  treatment,  can effectively  inhibit  the
penicillium roqueforti and listeria monocytogenes derived from packaged and unpackaged
cheeses. This are all examples, so how this technology is being employed and it is also
employed in vacuum packaged chicken breast. Which is the reduction of salmonella was 2.5
logs CFU per centimeter square after the treatment of 60 seconds at 5 centimeter respectively.
And while without changing the chemical quality and color of the sample using UV at 5 to 13
centimeter for about 5 to 60 seconds. This are all example what are all the microorganisms
and what are all the food products or process used in pulsed UV light. So this are all just
example of how much is the distance 5 to 30 centimeter distance between the pulse and your
food sample. So, this is the time limit. And cooked meat product, freshly cut mushrooms, the surface of the knives which used for
cutting the meat were also processed using pulsed UV light. Juices and milk also comes
under that category. So, this light can affect the color and texture of the food stuff depending
on the energy dosage and the distance, between the lamp and surface of the sample. So, if you
increase the distance there may be a good killing of microorganism. But, that also affects the
surface texture of the food. 
Due to shadow affect caused by the rough and uneven surfaces, the crevices or the pores of
foodstuffs, the effective radiation dosage for microbial inactivation can be reduced, resulting
in unsuitable treatment for cereals, grains and spices. So, what does it mean so if i have a
food particle so it has the pores kind of thing so inside the pores your UV light may not have
got inside the pores. So, that the contamination what is there in the pores it is last long so, it
cannot be treated using pulsed UV light. So, when you have such a foodstuff with the pores
or crevices it is better to avoid this technology. 
(Refer Slide Time: 34:41)
Pulsed electric field, it is same as that of the UV light so, there you used a lamp to create a
pulsed UV light. Here, you use the electricity to create a pulsed electric field. And, which
preserve the liquid and semi liquid nature foods to increase their shelf life. And, also the
important thing is so you can process liquids semi liquids food. But, it should not contain any
air bubbles. Because, otherwise it will go for gas ionization processes as well. It presents
several advantages over conventional heat treatments. One  is  the  better  retention  of  flavor,  color  and  nutritional  value,  improved  protein
functionality, increased the shelf life and reduces the pathogen levels. Which involves the
discharge of high voltage electric short pulses there it is UV light here it is a high voltage
electric short pulses. Which causes the transitory for permanent permeabilization of the cell
membrane.  So,  the  mechanism  here  is  use  to  damage  the  microorganism  is  permanent
permeabilization.
(Refer Slide Time: 35:46)
So, short time electric pulses 1 to 100 micro seconds in different range of electric field
density. For example 0.1 to 1 KV per centimeter which is for reversible permeabilization in
plant cells, 0.5 to 3 kilo volt per centimeter is used for irreversible permeabilization, 15 to 70
kilo volt per centimeter is use for irreversible permeabilization of microbial cells. The organs
treated here is Escherichia coli, Staphyloccus aureus, or Bacillus subtilis.(Refer Slide Time: 36:22)
So, this is the basic diagram so, here you have a treatment chamber so, you have a PEF
generation here. So, generated PEF goes to the treatment chamber. You untreated liquid food
sample so, which is pumped through pumps. And, here it is the flow meter which measures
the flow rate and it goes to temperature control which measure the temperature. And, it is fad
ant to the treatment chamber. This PEF generation taken care by the control and monitoring
system and after that it is getting cooled and after measuring the temperature it is collected in
the treated sample tank. 
(Refer Slide Time: 37:01)
Accepted mechanism is breakdown of cell membrane we have already told permeabilization.
The pores on cell membrane are formed by high intensity electricity field pulses. So, what
happens in UV the microorganism observes the UV light by which the photo products were
formed in the DNA molecules. But, that is not a normal regulatory function of DNA. So, due
to  which  translation  transcription  mechanism  of  DNA gets  changed  for  that  particular
microorganism that is the way it gets killed. 
But, here what happens is here the cell membrane observes this high intensity electric field.
So, that way the pores are generated in the membrane so which causes for the permeable
nature of outside components to inside the cell and components inside the cells comes out of
the cell membrane. With the increase in the number of pores loss of cell content intrusion of
surrounding media occurs, which is also called as cell electroporation. 
So, a pores creation of pores using electric field that is nothing but a cell electroporation.
Which depends upon electric field intensity, treatment time, temperature, pulse width, shape,
electrical conductivity, PH, and intrinsic factors of microorganisms. Such as type size, and
microbial  load  and growth stage everything  is  a important  factor  when you apply  PEF
technology.
(Refer Slide Time: 38:32)
And successful application of the PEF treatment depends on biological factors cells types,
size shape and cell density, arrangement and cells position, dielectric breakdown. Dielectric
breakdown is nothing but how the component gets broken when application of electric field is
happening. And physical chemical property changes of the food conductivity pH and ionic
strength. Advantage is PEF processing inactivate microorganisms with minimal or no effect
on the quality attributes of the food. 
Retention of the fresh aroma and flavor of the food. Efficiency is better than traditional
thermal methods that take long periods of time. It is the fact that pores of microorganisms are
able to survive PEF food processing spores till now we have discussed three technologies
pulsed UV, pulsed electric field and HHP. None of them could take care of spores it has not
been optimize because, adequate research has not been done to justify the use of this systems
in the food processing industries. 
It is not that no industries using there are industries using this non thermal technologies.
Since, the kinetic mechanism of the killing of microorganism is not well established for this
non thermal technologies it will be very difficult to employ in the higher scaled process in the
industries. There is limited commercial availability of PEF processing systems because of the
high  initial  cost.  Cost  is  also  another  common  disadvantage  in  all  the  non-thermal
technologies. 
(Refer Slide Time: 40:14)
The next one is high volt or discharge so, this is used in many areas such as biochemistry,
biology, medicine and microbial inactivation of food. Already and it is also used in bio
compounds extraction from different products. Main feature is that this generation of strong
dynamic shock waves generated by the electric arc. It creates the electric arc which further
creates  the  shock  waves  those  shock  waves  act  on  the  food  particle  and  it  kills  the
microorganisms. 
The arc discharged leads to a multitude of physical and chemical effects. The high pressure
shock waves can induce bubbles cavitations which can create strong secondary shocks with
very short duration. These shocks can interact with structures of the cells. So what we told
electric arc which further creates the shock waves high pressure shock waves. So, this high
pressure shock waves leads to cavitation. Cavitation is the process when the local pressure is
reduced. 
There may be a formation of bubbles this bubbles coiled with each other and forms the
cavitation. So, this cavitation further produce the secondary shock waves so this secondary
shock waves are reason for the killing of the microorganisms. So, that is the main principle
behind the HVAD process.
(Refer Slide Time: 41:45)
The phenomena result is mechanically  rupture of the cell  membrane  that accelerate  the
extraction of intracellular compounds. So, intracellular components comes out of the cell
membrane. And, the voltage are discharge prompts the formation of highly reactive free
radicals. So, this is important from chemical species in food, such as oxygen. It forms the
highly reactive radicals so this free radicals are toxic components that serve to inactivate
certain intracellular components required for cellular metabolisms. 
So, this free radicals  are toxic components  that serve to inactivate  certain intra cellular
components. See this is to way around, one is it forms free radicals in the cell structure of the
microorganisms and at the same time its also creates, such free radicals it may also create
such free radicals in the food particles as well. So in the microorganisms it said it is the
advantage for us because, this free radicals changes cell function and regulatory function. So,
that way microorganisms gets killed.
But, in the food side it is the unwanted one if creates any reactive free radicals. The bacterial
inactivation was not due to heating, but mainly due to irreversible loss of membrane function
as a semipermeable barrier between the bacterial cell and the environment. The formation of
toxic components which is nothing but a oxygen radicals and other oxidizing components
was  noticed.  The  measure  drawback  is  contamination  of  the  treated  foods  by chemical
products of electrolysis this i told.
 So, if it is done on the microorganisms side it is advantages for us because that is the way
microorganisms gets killed, but it also does the same thing in the food particle side as well.
The  disintegration  of  food  particles  by  shock  waves  is  another  disadvantage  in  HVAD
process.(Refer Slide Time: 43:41)
The next one is cold plasma technic the cold plasma this you might be knowing. How to
change solid to liquid, liquid to gas. So, the cold plasma comes here so what happens is when
the gas is heated it gets ionized. So, that is the way plasma is created when it is deionized it
comes back to original gasses form. So, this is the generation of cold plasma so there is a AC
power unit through which the high power is given to the electrodes. 
So, between this electrodes your carrier gas is flowing so that is the way gas is getting
ionized. The energy is given by the high voltage AC source to the electrodes so from their gas
ionization happens between the by electric barriers. So, this is the way the creation of cold
plasma the creation of plasma generation happens. So, this set up is given to the treatment
chamber. (Refer Slide Time: 44:57)
So that probably here we are seeing. So, this is the gas system through which gas is coming
here so this is the pressure to maintain the pressure level. So, this is your high voltage ac
current. So, this two are electrodes so this is dielectric barrier. So through which when the gas
is flowing in between. Then it creates the ionization which is nothing but a plasma. So, this is
fad ant to the treatment chamber where your food samples are kept. 
(Refer Slide Time: 45:38)
The CP is an ionized gas cold plasma which comprises of large number of different species.
There may be electron positive and negative ions, free radicals, electrons gas atoms, photons
all are generated during the plasma generation. And, it is suitable to be used for the process
for which high temperature is not recommended. CP could be employed in inactivation of the
microorganisms on the surface of fresh and processed food. And, the accumulation of charged
particles can rupture the cell membrane. 
And, the oxidation of the lipids, amino acids and nucleic acids with reactive oxygen species
and nitrogen species cause changes that lead to microbial death or injury. The same way that
what we have seen in the HVAD. So, here also oxidation of lipids amino acids nucleic acids
happens so that way it alters the cell regulatory function and that is the way microbial death
happens. The contribution of mentioned mechanism depends upon the plasma characteristics
and the type of the microorganisms used.
So we have seen one example clastodium botulinum even if you apply 827 mega Pascal at 75
degree the spores will not get killed, but the optimally microbial safe pressure for HHP is 600
mega Pascal itself. So, even if you apply high pressure certain organisms will not get killed
the same is applicable for cold plasma as well it depend upon the type of organisms. The
application is decontamination of raw agricultural product of apple lettuce, almond, and
mangoes melon and egg surface and real food system which is nothing but a cooked meat
cheese etc.
(Refer Slide Time: 47:21)
Key limitation early state of technology and development. Variety and complexity of the
necessary equipment. And, largely explored impacts of cold plasma treatment on the sensory
nutritional qualities of treated food it is unexplored largely unexplored. The treatment must
be proven not to have negative impact on the organoleptic and nutritional properties of the
food it should be proven. So, why it is we have already told since it creates all organoleptic
changes in the cell functions. 
But, also it is also responsible to create such a organoleptic changes in the food as well, but
that is unwanted for us. Because, we supposed to maintain the nutritional level of the food.
So, that is the way this cold plasma is disadvantages and studies to specify the extend in
which CP affect the chemical and the nutritional properties of food and shelf life. So, that is
very much needed. And safety and cost aspects to apply into practice the CP and scaling up
this technology in food industry is not well that established. So, this we have seen already.
(Refer Slide Time: 48:43)
Another is ultrasound, ultrasound is nothing but whatever we could here. So, beyond that
level that is nothing but an ultrasound technology. So, this is happens due to cavitation
phenomena I have already explained you shear disruption, localized heating and free radicals
formation, so this is the way the microorganisms gets killed. The propagation of ultrasound in
the medium creates a series of compressions and through which due to compression the
damage of microorganisms happens equivalent to HHP. When the energy reaches the certain point the rarefaction will exceed the attractive forces
among the molecules rarefaction is nothing but decompression followed by the generation of
cavitation bubbles. I have told when the pressure is reduced locally reduced the formation of
bubbles happens so that is the way then the coiled and that is the way cavitation forms.
Unstable bubbles collapse violently and produce outward propagating shockwaves. Which
can destroy the cell walls of microorganisms or break polymer chains easily. 
The effects can also let to the breakdown of water molecules causing highly reactive free
radicals it may be generated in the oxygen species as well and water molecules as well. So,
which is nothing but H2O will become H and OH. There is a free electron so free radicals
these free radicals can modify or damage the intracellular components including DNA. So
this happens at the microorganisms side as well and food side as well. So, this kind of free
radicals may be happening at the food side as well but that is unwanted. 
So, at that particular ultra sound level at that particular time. It should only form a free
radicals in the cell functions of the microorganism but not on the food that is the optimization
level we need to be extra careful. 
(Refer Slide Time: 50:49)
It depends upon the ultrasonic intensity, frequency, temperature, processing time, and which
wave we use pulse or continuous wave from pulse I have explained you this is the one of the
example continuous means so kind of sign view, and the microbial species and growing phase
this is also important.(Refer Slide Time: 51:09)
So, here are some application and treatment conditions and with which principle ultrasound
works and are all the advantages. For example I will just take up two three one is I will take
up the sterilization. The frequency of ultrasound used is 20 kilo hertz and the energy is
ultrasound is greater than 1 watt per centimeter square. So, the principle is thinning of cell
membrane localized heating and production of free radicals by which your microbial damage
occurs. And, advantage wise it improves the quality of food at lower temperatures. 
And, another  example  maybe  we can take  the  cooking, cooking  the  frequency is  same
frequency 20 kilo hertz and energy is greater 10 watt per centimeter square. It improves the
heat transfer in the cooking and reduce the cooking time and increase the quality of food for,
example  how  we  cooking  the  normal  LPG  stow  and  microwave.  Here  the  ultrasound
improves the heat transfer and reduce the cooking and increase the quality of the food. So,
other applications and treatment conditions principle advantage you may refer the references
what I have given from their only it is taken the table is taken.(Refer Slide Time: 52:31)
And this table compares all the technologies whatever we have discussed. For example, high
pressure processing which is nothing but HPP. So, the typically the pressures between 200
and 400 and the temperature is less than 50 degree. So, this is the descriptions of the process
and it is independent of food geometry. We have already told it is working under the principle
of hydrostatic equilibrium. So it does not matter which food geometry we are applying and
equipment size and operator parameters are important. 
And  temperature  and  treatment  time  is  also  important  when  we  apply  HPP. So,  the
permeabilization  of  the  cell  membrane  is  the  mechanism  by  which  the  inactivation  of
microorganism occurs, used for packaged foods or bulk foodstuff the HHP is used. And, if
you go for cold plasma it is typically the barrier glow discharge between the two parallel
electrodes. So, we have seen between the electrodes the carrier gases flown. So, through
which the plasma is generated. 
The treatment conditions depends upon as pressure type of flow and frequency and power of
plasma  excitation  everything  are  matters  and  gas  composition  also  critical  factor  and
destruction lipid buy layer of the cell membrane happens in this CPL. And, used for the
surface of the raw products and packaging materials. So, you can see for other process as well
though we have discuss in the class thus gives you, the shorten description of the process and
critical fact is to be considered and mechanism of inactivation and their applications.(Refer Slide Time: 54:19)
So, this compares the strength and weakness of the age factor. For example, if you take HPP
it is high pressure processing somebody says the high pressure processing there are two
categories one is high hydrostatic pressure and high hydro dynamic pressure technology. To
please do not be confused with high pressure processing can be done is to with high hydro
static pressure, that is mostly applied for static fluids and high hydro dynamic pressure
technologies applied on motion of the fluids. 
So this both comes under the category of HPP so, it does not matter whether it is the HPP or
HHP or HDP. The principle behind is bit different. Because, HHP works on Pascal law HDP
you are doing it in the flow of liquids. So, do not be confused with this three terminologies.
The strength is wide range of microorganism inactivation including spoilage or pathogenic
bacteria moles is fungal viruses. Preservation of taste, nutrients and color minor negative
effect on sensory quality.
Shucking meat from shellfish, and easy to commercialize and energy efficient weakness wise
limited on spores. Spores, nothing can be done and expensive equipment because, of high
pressure and batch process and limited packaging option. And, if you see cold plasma this we
already seen wide variety of microorganisms, low temperature, rapid and effective. So, if you
see weaknesses low penetration death some alteration on sensory quality as well possible
residues on the food. Because we are using CP so forms the free radicals so, there may be a residues on the food as
well so this is weakness. For all the technologies whatever we have discussed the strength
and weakness are given so you may refer for each and every technology.
(Refer Slide Time: 56:16)
So, some times what happens we can combine two technologies as well, this is one of the
such example. The product is pumped and it is sprayed using ultrasonic nozzle. So, this is
what we have seen is ultrasonic technology. And, then your pulsed UV light technology is
used, so combined both ultrasound as well as pulsed UV technology. So, this is the way you
can  increase  death  of  microorganisms  or, sometimes  you  wanted  to  maintained  certain
sensory qualities of the food. So, this way you can combined both the technologies to achieve
your goal.(Refer Slide Time: 57:06)
So, this are additional references and resources which you would like to refer. Whatever we
discussed in the class. And, mainly this tables were taken from those references thank you.