Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Department of Chemical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
Lecture 15
Microwave and Radio Frequency Heating
Good morning all, today we are going to discuss about Microwave and Radio Frequency
Heating. Till now, as we discussed earlier we have seen separate thermal processing and
the thermal processing equipments required and three lectures mainly were on aseptic
processing. 
(Refer Slide Time: 0:56) 
So, another few lectures we are going to discuss different non thermal processing. So, one
such case is microwave and radio frequency heating, what we are going to discuss today. (Refer Slide Time: 1:06) 
The introduction goes like this, for microwave food processing, it is a electromagnetic
wave technique right. So, the frequency used are 915 megahertz and 2450 megahertz so
which is mainly used for food processing applications right and as far as radio frequency
processing is concerned, there are three frequencies which are used for food processing. 
So, what are all they? 13.56 megahertz, 27.12 megahertz and 40.68 megahertz, actually
in these two mechanisms either microwave or radio frequency the heat is generated by
dielectric or ionic mechanisms. So, we are going to see one by one, what are all the
frequencies and where the microwave frequency actually lies, everything we are going to
see in the figure which is coming up. 
The dielectric hitting is due to oscillations of the water molecules in the food. So that
means, the food which you are going to apply for microwave processing should have the
polar molecules which is nothing but the water molecules in it. Oscillatory migration of
ions  in  the  food  also  generates  heat  because  we  have  already  seen  there  are  two
mechanism by which the heat is generated, one is ionic polarization and another one is
dielectric mechanism, right. 
So, the migration of ions also generates heat under the influence of oscillating electric
field. So, both radio frequency as well as the microwave food processing provide rapidheating and thus require less time. So, when we compare with the conventional food
processing methods, it requires less time because it provides the rapid heating that you
might have experienced in day to day life as well. So, when you pre heat the food in the
microwave, you require less time than what you do in conventional cheating method. 
Also provide relatively more uniform heating compared to conventional hot air heating.
So this is due to volumetric phenomena, this is due to volumetric heating phenomena. So,
what  happens  in  the  conventional  hot  air  is,  this  is  nothing  but  surface  heating
phenomena, right. 
Another one is the equilibration of the product following heating can help to level the
temperature distribution and improve the uniformity. So after the product heating, so after
it  is  packaged,  so  it  can  help  level  the  temperature  distribution  and  improve  the
uniformity. So that this particular point also we will see over the number of slides. 
(Refer Slide Time: 4:20) 
So  this  is  introduction  about  the  various  frequencies  of  radio,  microwave,  infrared,
visible, ultraviolet, X ray and gamma ray. So, the wavelength for radio frequency lies
between 10 to the power of 3 to 10 to the power of minus 2 which is for microwave, so
almost whatever we are going to discuss comes under this wavelength range 10 to the
power of 3 to 10 to the power of minus 2, frequency wise this is a hertz, right. So, theradio frequency this one is 10 to the power of 4 and here it is 10 to the power of 8 for
microwave. So, whatever the processing we are going to do comes in between this. 
(Refer Slide Time: 5:04) 
So this is we have seen, right we have just told, right one is surface phenomena, which is
nothing but my conventional heating, the microwave heating is nothing but volumetric,
volumetric heating, so what happens? So, when you apply a heat source, so it starts from
the surface of the food, right food material or any material, then it slowly penetrates
inside right. So, if it is a solid food the conduction would be, would be governing this
penetration. 
So, if it is a convection, we have already seen for example, you have a (())(05:49) inside
that  you  have  a  liquid  food,  right.  So,  when  the  conventional  or  normal  heating
mechanism happens, so this will become a hot fluid because it is getting heated, it density
lowers and it rises to the above and the cold fluid which is in the top layer which comes
down then fills this space. So this is the convection phenomenon. 
So, in both cases, the surface only gets heated first then when the heat has to penetrate
inside the food material or any material right, but microwave heating, it does not happen
as it is happening in the conventional heating. So directly it goes to the center of the foodparticle, right because it is a wave it can penetrate to the center of the food particle. So
while penetrating also it heats other parts of the food material. 
So, due to volumetric heating phenomena, so you almost see the uniform temperature
distribution, so this comes under high range, this blue line is, blue comes for low range,
right if you see in the surface, you will not find any low indicator, low temperature
indicator, so somewhere around the surface you have something of this kind, right. So it
is above the low temperature range. So in this way you get uniform heating during
microwave heating, which is not happening in the conventional heating phenomenon. 
(Refer Slide Time: 7:24) 
So, who introduced the first microwave heating? Is Spencer who patented the idea in
1945, 1991 microwave heating has become so popular and microwave heatings were
developed  originally  for  military  requirements  even  the  pasteurization  or  canning
operations,  it  was  developed  originally  for  military  requirements  only  because  they
wanted to have the food which is going to be used for you know long days for their food
consumption. So that is the way the pasteurization also came into existence, how do I
increase the shelf life of the food or how do I pack it in the can and which will not go
waste for a few days. So all these concepts came for military requirements only at first. So,  here  also  the  microwave  techniques  were  developed  originally  for  military
requirements  to  design  and  manufacture  microwave  radar,  navigation  and
communications during the Second World War. (The) In food processing what are the
advantages of microwave? Speed of heating, energy saving, because we require only less
time so we can save energy as well. 
Precise process control, if I want to control the temperature or power input I can control
and fastest startup and shutdown times because we might have seen in some of the
thermal operations there is something called come up time, right even though you switch
on your heating medium it will take some time to reach to the particular (())(8:55)
temperature.  So,  those  kind  of  timings  can  be  reduced  or  can  be  nullified  using
microwave. 
And higher quality products in terms of taste, texture and nutritional content, nutritional
content, require less time as well as high temperature right. So this will be taken care by
the microwave heating. 
(Refer Slide Time: 9:18) 
So now, we are getting into basic theory of microwave, microwaves are non-ionizing,
time varying electromagnetic waves of radiant energy, so this comes under radiation
phenomena. So, what we discussed here right. So, this is either by conduction or by
convection. So this comes under radiation phenomena of heat transfer and these are
electromagnetic waves okay. 
Radiant energy with the frequencies ranging from 300 megahertz to 300 Gigahertz, right.
Due to possible interferences.  So, why we, here also told,  right there are only two
frequency ranges applicable for microwave food processing and there are three frequency
ranges applicable for radio frequency, why it is so? Because not to interfere with the othersignals right. So due to possible interferences with the TV or radio waves, microwave
ovens  operate  at  915  and  2450  megahertz  allocated  by  the  International
Telecommunications Union, otherwise, there is no theory behind why I need to fix this
particular frequency, the same applicable with radio frequency as well, not to interfere
with the other signals. 
So,  domestic  ovens  normally  operate  at  the  higher  frequency  2450  megahertz  and
microwaves travel similarly to light waves and reflected by large metallic objects, so
metallic objects microwaves gets reflected. So metallic objects are conductive, right they
are good conductors of heat, right and observed by some dielectric materials and some
small  strips  of  metal,  one  exception  is  nothing  but  carbon,  it  also  observes  the
microwave, so absorbed by some dielectric materials. 
So, dielectric materials are the one which absorbs the microwave energy, small strips of
metal which is also a exceptional one and transmitted through other dielectric materials,
there are certain dielectric materials through which microwave is transmitted, which are
glass, ceramics and most thermo plastics which allow microwaves to pass through with
little or no absorption. 
So these materials can be used as that containers, right so which allows the microwave
because it has to penetrate through the containers to the food material. So, so these are all
the materials which allows the microwave to pass through, which pass through, only pass
through or with little absorption. So that means little heating also may be there, right. 
So, the metallic objects only reflect and dielectric materials are the one which absorbs the
microwave  energy  and  there  are  certain  dielectric  materials  which  only  helps  in
transmitting the microwaves right. So these reflected by large metallic object, which are
nothing but conductors of heat. So, they can be used as a wave guide so wave guide in the
sense. 
So, when waves are coming like this, so I want these waves to be accumulated at one
particular  point,  right.  So  I  wanted  to  use  these  metallic  object  which  reflects  themicrowave energy as a wave guide so, that even if the wave goes here it reflects back to
the place where I wanted right. So, this can be used as a wave guide.
And absorbs that material those were dielectric materials that are nothing but our food
particles  because  we  already  told  dielectric  materials  are  polar  molecules,  so  food
contains water so that is nothing but a dielectric material and there are certain electric
material  which  transmits  the  microwave  energy  those  materials  can  be  used  as  a
packaging material. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:32) 
So this is the basic diagram how microwave food processing, how it happens in the
domestic and microwave drying process how it happens commercially, right. So this is a
cavity magnetron in the domestic microwave oven, the cavity magnetron is the one which
produces the microwave, right from the cavity magnetron it passes through here and it is
a wave guide I already told so these are all the material which reflects the microwave
energy then it goes through the ceramic windows, we already have seen ceramics are the
one which transmits the microwave energy, right. 
Wave guides are the one the material mostly metals are good conductors of heat. So
which reflects the microwave energy, so that it will not deviate from the path, right and
again it transmits through ceramic windows and this is your food being cooked and itgoes here reflects and comes back to the food material that is the way the heating is done,
microwave heating is done.
The similar to this for microwave dryer, so these are all the particles to be dried so this is
conveyed through your conveyer belt and here you have a cavity magnetron. So this is a
wave guide, this is the way it goes here and it passes through the ceramic window, then it
goes and reflects back and that is the way the food which has to be dried will be dried
using microwave okay. So this is the conveyor belt so it is a continuous process, it is just
an example there are other control mechanisms everything is there. So it is just to explain
you the principle of microwave heating, continuous flow of materials to be dried. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:45) 
So, the similar  processing  for radio frequency is, so here we have radio  frequency
oscillator so which creates the radio frequency energy and it is passed through in between
the capacitor plates right, which absorbs the radio frequency energy, then in between you
have a, this these are all the polarized molecules in the dielectric or agitated by the
oscillating electric field across the plates, causing heating by ion drag, right. 
So, what happens? So, I am creating here the radio frequency so these two are capacitive
plates, which absorbs the radio frequency and the polarized molecules which is kept in
between the capacitive plates, which are agitated by the oscillating electric field, the fieldis generated by the radio frequency was observed by capacitive plates which helps the
polarized molecule to get heated by using oscillating the electric field across the plates
which causes the heating by ion drag. 
So, the oscillation further, the oscillations further (())(17:06) (frictiona) frictional effects
so which generates the heat. What happens is, based on the ionic moment the plus will go
here,  the  minus  will  go here, they align  them  according  to  the  frequency  which  is
generated  by  the  radio  frequency  accelerated  that  is  it.  So, when  they  are  aligning
themselves to the field of radio frequency, there may be ion drag. So this ion drag creates
the frictional efforts which further creates the heating effect. So this is the material to be
heated placed as dielectric between the plates of capacitor right. 
So, by now, we know what is dielectric, dielectrics are not a conductors which conducts
only the heat or electricity, but which does not conduct the microwave it just transmit and
the insulator, sorry this conductors reflects and insulate a transmits sometimes it also
absorb, the dielectric material comes in between so these are the materials which absorbs
the  microwave  energy, mostly  polar  molecules  right.  So,  here  what  happens?  This
dielectric material when they align themselves according to the radio frequency, so there
will be a ion drag. So which further creates a frictional effects that is converted into heat. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:40) 
So, microwaves also refracted when traveling from one dielectric material to the next. So
this you have already seen refractive index. So this is also applicable for microwave, it is
analogous to the light waves bend when passing from air to water. So the same refractive
index, which is applicable for light, so there will be an analogous to this mechanism, the
same mechanism can be applicable for microwaves as well. So, when it travels from one
dielectric material to another, it will be refracted. 
And there are two mechanisms  by which microwaves produce heat in the dielectric
materials,  one  is  ionic  polarization,  another  one  is  dipole  rotation,  right.  The  ionic
polarization occurs when ion in the solution move in response to an electric field. So this
is applicable for both microwave as well as radio frequency, right the kinetic energy is
given up to the ions by the electric field to move, these ions collide with each other and
converting kinetic energy into heat, this is what I just explained. 
So, when ions in solution move in response to the electric field and the kinetic energy is
given up to the ions by the electric field, which is created by either microwave or radio
frequency, when they collide each other there will be a friction, kinetic energy will be
converted into heat. 
What is Dipole rotation? When the electric field is rotating at 2.5 into 10 to the power of
9  hertz  that  is  nothing  but  whatever  the  microwave  energy  you  are  giving  to  the
molecules, here numerous collisions can occur generating a great deal of heat. Dipole
rotation mechanism is depends on the existence of polar molecule. So this is very much
important, you need to have polar molecules then only they can align themselves based
on the electric field given to them. So due to their collision when they rotate, it gets
collided with each other so which generates the heat. (Refer Slide Time: 20:56) 
So this is the example, one of the first one is dipole rotation. So this is my water molecule
which is nothing but a polar molecule, right. So the H plus ions this is 2 hydrogen ions,
this is OH plus and OH minus. So, when it rotates it may be this direction or it may be
this direction, due to this rotation there may be a collision between the molecules which
further generates the heat. The ionic migration is nothing but the OH minus 10 to go to
positive side and H plus ions come and align near the negative side, right due to attraction
between the positive and negative side. 
So, due to this migration there may be a collision so which further produces the heat so
this is due to dipole plus minus there will be a rotation, whether minus can come here or
plus can go here. So this is due to rotation, due to rotation collision happens and you will
get the heat due to frictional or kinetic energy conversion and here the ionic migration,
the ions positive or negative ions try to align themselves according to the electric field
applied. So due to which your heating will be produced. (Refer Slide Time: 22:20) 
The water molecules are randomly oriented under normal conditions. Normal condition if
you see OH minus and H plus will be distributed throughout the material in the presence
of an electric field, the polar molecules line up with the field. That is what I told based on
the applied field, based on the positive and negative ion side, negative side the ions will
try to orient themselves. 
The electric field of a microwave system alternates at 2.45 10 to the power of 9 hertz. So
that while the molecules try to align themselves with this changing field, because they
have already random motion, so when they see, when they get the electric field, so they
try to align themselves to the, according to this field, after which the heat is generated due
to collision between the molecules, when the field is removed the molecules returned to
their original random condition or random orientation. 
In capacitive  or radio  frequency  heating  the  material  is  usually  placed  between  the
electrodes, whereas in microwave heating energy a closed cavity or oven is needed. So, if
you see here, so your dielectric material which has to be heated it is kept between the
electrodes and if you see for microwave energy you need a closed cavity. So here also
there is a closed cavity so that your energy will reflect and heats the material. 
When microwaves interact with polar or polarizable molecules in food, the polar or
polarizable molecules try to reorient themselves to follow the field. This results in heatgeneration by the polar or polarizable molecules, if the time for the establishment and
decay of their polarization is comparable to the period of the high oscillation provided by
the microwave frequency. So what they wanted to mention here is we have already seen
in normal condition it randomly orients, right but when you apply a electric field it try to
align themselves to the applied electric field. 
So you need to give that particular time for the molecules to get it aligned and due to that
collision to produce the heat. So, if the given microwave frequency is not enough for
them to align or the amount of time with which the microwave frequency is applied to the
dielectric materials to produce the heat. So these two are very much important to get the
particular heating done so that is what so it has to be established for a particular time and
it has the power what you give, right the frequency what you create as well as the time at
which the frequency is applied to the dielectric materials based on which you are heating
will be done. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:10) 
So this is again one of the diagram with which so this is nothing but an ionic migration,
ion  migration.  So this  is  nothing  but  dipole  rotation,  right  so ionic  migration  what
happens this plus and minus random without field, if field is applied, so this direction all
plus ions move right so all plus if you see this direction, all minus ions will move this
direction, right. So, in this way they orient themselves, right. And if the field direction is this then you are plus all move this direction and minus, so if
your field direction this side all plus move this direction and minus will move this
direction and this is for dipole rotation. So the same way, the plus minus it rotates
randomly in the no field, if the field direction is applied here the plus try to rotates this
way and if the field direction is this side and plus try to rotates in that way. So when it
rotates it, it collides that is the way kinetic energy is converted into heat. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:24) 
The classical view of microwave heating is to consider the heating process as due to the
rotation of a dipolar molecule in the viscous medium dominated by friction. The heating
may also result from the moment of electrically charged ions within the food. So if, if the
food has electrically charged ions, right so then heating may also results from there. In
essence, microwave heating of foods results from interaction of the microwaves with
ionic or dipolar content of the food. 
If it is a dipolar content, it is rotation, if it is interacting with the ionic due to ionic
migration the heat will be generated. Water, proteins and carbohydrates are among the
dipolar ingredients in the food. In food, there are volumetrically distributed, means water,
proteins as well as carbohydrates are volumetrically distributed within the food material.
Consequently, microwave  heating  results  in  the  volumetric  heating  phenomena.  Theeffectiveness of this volumetric heating and depth to which it occurs is determined by the
dielectric properties of the material, right and the frequency of the microwave. 
This just I have also mentioned, what we told us, the frequency what you apply and the
time with which the frequency is applied both will have the effect on heating to be done
on the dielectric material. The same way here the effectiveness of the volumetric heating
and the depth to which it occurs determined by the dielectric properties. 
For example, my dielectric materials will have very good absorption of the microwave
energy then it is good for the material  to get heated,  but if it, if the absorption of
microwave energy by the dielectric materials are low, then accordingly my heating may
be affected. So it is based on dielectric properties of the material and the frequency of the
microwave. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:32) 
The dielectric properties of the material determine the amount of incident microwaves
reflected, transmitted, absorbed by the material. For low moisture hygroscopic foods such
as egg white powder, the increase in product hygroscopicity due to moisture loss that
increases the latent heat of vaporization during heating will require heating equations that
account for changes in the product hygroscopicity to accurately predict the microwave
heating and mass transfer characteristics of foods during mathematical modeling. When you model microwave heating. There are three equations, first in certain classes
before we have discussed so what I will be solving is, if it is only conduction, solid food,
so I will be solving the energy equation, to get to know the temperature, right. If it is a
microwave heating, I need to solve extra Maxwell, Maxwell's equation to give this wave
form of energy to the energy equation, right. 
So  along  with  that  if  I  have  a  moisture  food  right,  so  the  increase  in  product
hygroscopicity due to moisture loss that increases the latent heat of vaporization. So there
may be latent heat of vaporization which converts the normal moisture which is there in
the food into water vapor. So there will be a loss of material, right. So this also to be
taken into account while doing the modeling part. 
So,  you  need  to  solve  species  conservation  equation  as  well,  species  conservation
equation,  right.  So,  heating  equations  that  account  for  changes  in  the  product
hygroscopicity to accurately predict the microwave heat and mass transfer characteristics
of the food, mass transfer as well as heat transfer we need to solve okay. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:50) 
So, the dielectric properties of the food, right the dielectric property most important in the
microwave heating of the food is the ratio of the dielectric properties expressed as the
ratios  of dielectric properties  of the free space, right. The dielectric  property of theparticular material to the dielectric property of the free space is nothing but dielectric
property. 
Gives the relative dielectric constant and relative dielectric loss factor. So this is nothing
but epsilon dash and dielectric loss factor is nothing but epsilon double dash. So this talks
about how much microwave and energy is getting absorbed. So this talks about how
much absorbed energy is getting converted into heat, how much absorbed microwave
energy is converted into heat or loss, right. 
The  relative  dielectric  constant  governs  the  amount  of  incident  power  absorbed  or
reflected while dielectric loss factor measures the amount of observed energy dissipated
or transmitted within the food. So, how much it is getting converted into heat that talks
about the dielectric loss factor, dielectric constant talks about how much is absorbed or
reflected. 
The dielectric properties of food at microwave frequencies are related to their chemical
composition, we already told how much dielectric material or polar molecule you have
that much it can absorb and it can be converted into heat. They are also highly depend on
the frequency of the applied electric field, we already told so that is why we told this is
very much important 10 to the power of 9 hertz and the moisture content of the food
because water is important here and the temperature and the bulk density of the food
material. (Refer Slide Time: 32:50) 
The dielectric constant at any frequency increases with the moisture content because how
much of is the moisture it can absorb that much microwave energy. So this is nothing but
a absorption of microwave energy. The loss factor may increase with the moisture content
depending on the temperature moisture content and frequency. So to absorb I need a
water molecule for the loss factor there may be a loss, there may be observed energy
converted into heat. So I cannot directly relate the loss factor with the temperature, but it
may increase or it may decrease with the temperature. 
The loss factor remains approximately constant for moisture contents below the critical
moisture content of the material. At constant temperatures the loss factor increases with
increasing moisture content, for most of the solid foods with moisture content greater
than their critical moisture content. So we have three factors here temperature, moisture
content and frequency. So, if you fix the temperature, loss factor increases with the
moisture content which is for most of the solid food with the moisture content greater
than their critical moisture content. 
The loss factor may, however, decrease or increase with the temperature, this is what I
told. So the loss factor also includes loss as well as the conversion of heat. So we cannot
directly relate to temperature and directly say it increases or decreases. In materials where the loss factor increases with the increase in temperature, uneven
heating in materials were loss factor increases with the increase in temperature, uneven
heating intensifies and thermal runaway may result. So the loss factor is nothing but
conversion of absorbed microwave energy into heat right. So, when the temperature is
increasing, when the loss factor is also increasing means so the amount of microwave
energy absorbed is getting converted into heat with minimum loss. So that means your
heating will be very much high. So the uneven heating intensifies and there may be a
thermal runaway condition. 
(Refer Slide Time: 35:02) 
The power supply is a significant part of the capital costs. So, when you compare we
have told the advantages of the microwave heating, but disadvantages its capital cost. A
magnetron requires anywhere from 4 to 10,000 volt to operate and the generator must
step up the voltage from the electrical outlet of 110 volt to the operating requirements,
what it is required and the magnetron creates the microwave signal which is fed into the
cavity, in the case of an industrial process this might be a conveyor belt for our domestic
purpose this is the cavity. 
And a microwave oven, compared to conventional oven it is more efficient but only
problem is the capital cost and apart from that, so you need to see this the voltage
regulation to use the microwave. (Refer Slide Time: 35:55) 
So these are all the introduction about the microwave energy and radio frequency energy
and what are all the characteristics of the food material because what we learnt is the
applied frequency is very much important and also the materials what you process, right
so that should be dielectric materials which absorbs the microwave energy and also due
to ionic rotation or dipole rotation or ionic migration the microwave will be converted
into heat. 
The  food  processing  thawing,  tempering,  reheating,  drying,  cooking,  baking  and
sterilization and pasteurization, blanching all the operations microwave can be applied.
So the first industrial microwave oven was introduced in 1960 to dry fried potato chips.
The  first  lightweight  countertop  oven,  what  we  use in  our  domestic  applications  is
designed in 1965. 
And blanching of vegetables, coffee roasting, freeze drying of food, everything it started,
when  it  started  it  was  used to  for  these  applications  and  capital  costs  of  industrial
microwave ovens have been reduced, we just discussed, right. So the capital cost of
microwave oven is one which reduces its applications in wide areas. So they have been
reduced due to a recent advances. (Refer Slide Time: 37:21) 
The first one is the cooking normally what we do, the cooking times of microwave ovens
are one quarter of the time or less than the conventional method what we use. And
microwaves are used to achieve quick internal heating and conventional heat sources are
used to produce the desired surface browning or crispiness, we have already seen the
microwave heating is a volumetric phenomena. So it first heats the inside part of the
food, it is not first a heating so it penetrates through the food material or dielectric
material, right food materials or dielectric materials because it has water, carbohydrates
etc. 
So, so, the internal part will be heated very quickly and very uniformly and in the surface
if  you  apply  conventional  heat  source  then  you  will  get  the  desired  browning  and
crispiness, right. On top of being flexible microwave processing offers user high degree
of control, for instance no lag startup heating, I told (38:20) period, flatter temperature
profiles, flatter temperature profiles in the sense for example, normal continuous flow
process you will get the velocity profile of this kind or if you heat it, the surface will be
heated first, right somewhere like this, you will get the bar chart if you do it the bar chart
right. 
So the average somewhere here it comes, right if you apply microwave so normally the
heating would be very uniformed and also your average temperature comes somewherelike this right. So you will get flatter temperature profiles in the finished product and
rapid response to the removal of heat. 
And microwaves have the ability to heat the products while they are still in the sealed
package. This is the very good advantage because I can just heat it with the sealed
packets itself, even if the packaging acts as an insulated, right but I do not need to heat
the packaging, right. So even if it is a insulator the microwave can penetrate through the
insulator and it can heat the food directly and they are capable of volume expansion
within the closed container as well as generating pressure. 
The commercially proven applications are dehydration of low moisture solids drying and
precooking of meat products, tempering of frozen foods.
(Refer Slide Time: 39:50) 
Then  thawing,  tempering  and  reheating,  the  tempering  of  food  requires  rising  the
temperature of the food item from the solidly frozen condition to the state where it can be
sliced and separated. So when I store the food in the frozen condition, when I take it out,
what we normally used to do is we used to little heat, or we usually keep it in the
atmospheric  temperature so that with long hours so that it can come to the normal
atmospheric temperature for further processing or slicing or separation. But that is what Itold, if conventionally it is a long and arduous process taking from several hours to a few
days to complete depending on the size, type and initial temperature of the food product. 
The conventional thawing and tempering offers these disadvantages, one is large cold
storage areas because I need to take it out and keep it for long hours to get the non-firmed
product, large inventories for, large inventories of frozen products, and sometimes what
happens is bacterial growth results from the long durations of the thawing, large amounts
of drip loss, adverse color changes, surface oxidation and high consumption of freshwater
everything happens. 
Microwave tempering is defined as the taking the product from the freezer temperature to
a condition which the product is not frozen, but it is still firm, right. So, it gives me the
product which is still in the firm condition, but it is not a frozen condition so that I can do
further operation right. So the slicing or the separation or further whatever the operation I
wanted to do. 
Tempering a temperature avoids overheating and results in minimal quality deterioration
and tremendous  energy savings when compared to conventional  tempering.  A lower
microwave tempering temperatures and short tempering durations, the duration are very,
very short, eliminate the conditions for microbial growth. 
(Refer Slide Time: 41:52) 
In  addition  to  shorter  time,  microwave  tempering  eliminates  the  need  for  the  large
temperature controlled storage areas and large inventories of frozen product. So what I
told, I have to remove the frozen product, if I am doing conventional tampering, I need to
maintain the temperature for long hours in the storage area. So, what I require is large
temperature controlled storage area as well as large inventories for the frozen food. So,
due to less timing, as well as shorter tempering durations as well as the microwave
tempering  temperatures,  these  two  disadvantages  of  conventional  tempering  can  be
avoided. 
The drip loss reduction up to 10 percentage adds the advantage when it is done by
microwave. Ability to process the products while they are still in their original container,
already be discussed, right we need not remove the packaging material. So most of
microwave tempering units operate at 915 it is not the domestic frequency range due to
higher penetration depth that this frequency provides so 915 provides higher penetration
depth that is why we do not use it for home cooking or domestic cooking because there
we use the quantity to be processed is not that large quantity, right. 
And high penetration depths are of extreme importance since the target materials are
usually fairly large, for example, frozen meat blocks or blocks of butter. If you do it in
home, then it will be very small blocks, right so, if you do it in the industry wise it will be
a large block so you need more penetration depth, penetration depth in the sense, for
example, this I have a material, so the microwave which passes through should have that
depth right. 
So, if I have a 915 megahertz frequency it has a higher penetration depth. For example, if
I have a small block then I do not require that penetrating depth, the depth is here very
small when compared to here okay. So the reheating is the process of increasing the
temperature of previously cooked food, this you are used to it, in home we used to do
cooked food we just to keep it in the microwave oven and get it reheated. The ability of
microwave heating to provide faster volumetric heating without the need to heat the
container or packaging material of the foods is the one of the main advantage. (Refer Slide Time: 44:28) 
And in the drying phenomena, it is also very much important so normally in conventional
drying what happens is there is two periods, one is constant rate period and another one is
falling rate period. So in the constant rate period, what happens is the surface moisture
will be removed first, then after that internal moisture will diffuse to the surface then it is
removed by the hot air, this is the conventional process, right. 
So,  if  you  remember  what  happens  when  the  microwave  energy  penetrates,  first  it
penetrates to inside the material. So that means the falling rate period moisture removal
will be done by microwave heating and the surface phenomena can be taken care by
conventional  drying  mechanism.  So, if we combine  both  of  them  then  we will  get
maximum efficiency compared to either totally apply conventional air drying or totally
apply microwave drying, right. 
So in the conventional air drying the surface moisture removal will be first, when it
comes to microwave drying so the internal moisture content would be removed first. So
when you apply both of them then you will get the better efficiency. (Refer Slide Time: 45:50) 
So  that  is  why  it  is  told  the  freshly  extruded  pasta  with  the  moisture  content  of
approximately 30 percentage initial moisture content is hot air dried at 71 to 82 degrees
centigrade to around 18 percentage. But combined microwave and hot air drying then
lowers the moisture level to 13 percentage almost 5 percentage moisture reduction extra
you get when you combine the microwave drying in the falling rate period, right. 
And some of the applications were soybean drying and dehusking, dehusking in the sense
you need to remove the outer layer as well as a further step toward the oil extraction,
when soybeans are conventionally dried they have to be kept for 3 to 5 days for the
moisture with in the seed to equilibrate. 
Moreover, the seed coat of the dried beans needs to be split for effective dehulling before
oil extraction. So that means I need not dry it for 4 to 5 days to remove the moisture
content  in  the  microwave  processing.  Moreover,  the  dehulling  will  be  the  easiest
operation if I do it with the microwave. (Refer Slide Time: 47:05) 
Then cooking, it is a normal operation so it improves the yield of 25 to 38 percentage and
also it renders high quality fat as a byproduct. And these are examples, the bacon may be
first preheated with the hot air before cooking with the microwave energy or microwave
energy alone for the whole process. The cooking, the bacon so processed is mainly
supplied as a precooked bacon for food service operations. 
So, the cooking also it can be done and blanching we have already seen in the blanching
operations, one of the heating medium would be microwave, if you use the microwave
energy so the time is 105 degrees centigrade in 2 minutes only. The minimum time to
achieve the same result was 30 minutes when conventional heating methods are used.(Refer Slide Time: 47:58) 
And then the baking, sterilization, pasteurization also the same microwave can be used as
a heating medium. So that when we were discussing the sterilization and pasteurization
also, we have discussed this particular thing. So only thing is here the temperature as well
as the time requirement would be lesser when you use the microwave heating.
(Refer Slide Time: 48:24) 
So these are for different applications what should be your frequency and power range
and what are all the products can be processed for tampering, batch or continuous thefrequency range is 915, the power range is 30 to 70 kilo watts, the processed products are
meat, fish poultry. 
The drying, vacuum or freeze drying the frequency range is 915 or 2.4 into 10 to the
power of 9 hertz, the power is 30 to 50. Pasta, onion, snack foods and fruit juices are the
products and precooking the same frequency range of 915, the power is 50 to 240 kilo
watt. The bacon, poultry, sausages, meat patties and sardines. 
The pasteurization and sterilization the frequency ranges 2.4 into 10 to the power of 9
hertz and the power is 10 to 30 kilowatts, the fresh pasta, milk, semi solid foods and
pouch packed food processed. The baking 915, 2 to 10 kilowatt and bread, donut and
proofing. 
(Refer Slide Time: 49:30) 
And when you apply the microwave heating there are two main properties to be taken
care, one is thermo physical properties of the food, other one is the applied field intensity
just we have seen, right here the applied field intensity which frequency range you are
using and also the applicators and the heating system what you use, right. The thermo
physical properties of the food is nothing but a size and shape. So, whether it is a
cylindrical shape or rectangular shape, or whether it is thick product or thin product all
comes under the size and shape of the food. 
(Refer Slide Time: 50:06) 
And a surface area also matters and specific heat also matters, specific heat is nothing but
a capacity to withhold the heat and surface area is nothing but we just have seen since it
is a volumetric phenomena, the heating at the surface would be lower than the heating of
the internal surface. So that also affects your heating profile. 
(Refer Slide Time: 50:26) 
And dielectric properties we have discussed enormously in the first few slides.
(Refer Slide Time: 50:34) 
And  radio  frequency  heating,  it  is  similar  to  the  microwave  processing,  only  the
difference is between the electrodes your dielectric materials are kept and it also offers
more uniform heating as well as more uniform field patterns. And this RF heating also
can be used for eating packaged bread, blanching of vegetables, thawing of frozen food
and post baking snack foods and pasteurization. 
(Refer Slide Time: 51:01) 
So these are references and additional resources, you would like to refer further. Thank
you.