Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Guwahati
Lecture 1
Food Microbiology: Concerns in Various Foods
Good morning everyone, today we are going to see about food micro biology, microbial growth
and concerns in various food. 
(Refer Slide Time: 0:39)
So before going into that lecture, the thermal processing of food, though it talks about what are
all the thermal processing applicable in for the food processing. Actually the thermal processing
is employed to increase the shelf life of food products, for commercial production and also it
paves the way to how processed food to store it for long time. So, it does not only depends upon
the thermal processing of the food, it also involves thermo bacteriology and what are all the
thermal  processing methods  available and how to design such process designs and how to
validate them in the commercial sterilisation or pasteurization method. So everything includes in
the thermal processing. So without thermal bacteriology I cannot design any thermal process to
increase the shelf life of the food.
So, the thermal bacteriology or food microbiologists very much important before we go into
detail about various thermal processing methods available for the food processing. So, in that
concern in this class we are going to review about various microorganisms available and their
concern on various food and how the food spoilage occurs and everything in big detail. Okay so
the microorganisms, the moment we say then it includes micro bacteria, yeasts and molds as well
as the viruses. So, the most important microorganism of food concern is bacteria. So most of the
bacterias  are  harmless  and  many  are  highly  beneficial  for  human,  human  beings.  So
lactobacillus; one such as Lactobacillus and Streptococcus Thermophilus. So, it mostly available
in the dairy products.
Some indicate the probable presence of filth which is nothing but transmission of salmonellosis
which is a disease, which mainly spreads through flies or cockroaches. And some are the reason
for disease causing our spoilage which is nothing but example is Clostridium Perfingen and
Bacillus Cereus. And few cause disease as well as, those were Clostridium Botulinum, okay. So,
in (bac) bacteria  there  are thousands of species  available  and they are single celled  micro
organisms and they available in the spherical, straight, rods or spiral rods. And they reproduce by
diving into two cells, under ideal conditions the doubling time is about 15 minutes. So, each 15
minutes it goes doubling.
The rod shaped bacteria exist in two forms, one is the dormant spores and another one is active
vegetative cells, okay. So the vegetative cells forms pores under adverse conditions as a means of
survival and spore forms preserve the bacteria from starvation, drying, freezing, chemicals and
heat. So these are adverse conditions for the bacterial growth. So, what is vegetative cells do is,they form a spores and keep it is as a reserve, when the favourable conditions comes they start
forming,  becoming  a  vegetative  cell  then  it  starts  its  reproduction.  So  when  conditions
favourable the spores germinate and each spore again become a vegetative cell with the ability to
reproduce. 
So, this conversion of spores to vegetative cell and vegetative cells to spores is nothing but a
conversion of its form, it is not a pure reproduction so after forming the vegetative cell only it
can reproduce. So most of the sporulating bacteria that grow in the presence of air belongs to the
Genus Bacillus,  most of the Bacillus  bacterias  were sporulating  bacteria,  they grow in the
presence of air and most that grow only in the presence of air is the Clostridium Genus. So they
are anaerobic bacterias.
And one more thing I would like to emphasis here is, we are going to see very basics of what are
all the microorganisms available and there concern in various food but I would suggest you to
read more about all these organisms and their concerns in various foods with proper food micro
biology book, okay. So here we are only going to review certain important points which we need
to know before designing any thermal processing. 
(Refer Slide Time: 5:28)
So, next we will see about the yeasts and molds. The yeasts the example is, Saccharomyces,
Cerevisiae and Aspergillus Niger. So this is most common, so you might have known already, are
oval shaped or slightly larger than bacterial cells. They reproduce by budding. So budding each
cell can produce several buds or swellings which break away to form new, fully formed daughter
cells. So the reproduction happens here by budding. Molds as found on bread, fruit, damp paper
or other surfaces  are  actually  composed of millions  of microscopic  cells  which  are joined
together, form as a chain and which have numerous branches called hyphae, right.
So they form if you see, if you might have seen in the bread surface, the black masses or green
masses, so which are nothing but a cells joined together to form a chain and which also have a
branches like hyphae. Molds can thrive in conditions too adverse for bacteria or yeasts, okay. So
they produce by spores again, the molds that are frequently present as a green or black masses on
the protruding hyphae. Hyphae is nothing but branches. So, yeasts and molds grow on most
foods where there are small amounts of nutrient and moisture. 
It is opposite to bacteria. So the yeasts and molds grow on dry fruits, salted fish, bread, pickles,
fruits,  jams,  jellies,  and  similar  commodities.  So  they  predominant  high  salt  and  sugar
environments. Who? Yeasts and molds but for bacteria, they are adverse conditions. Bacteria find
conditions  of  low  pH,  low  moisture,  or  low  temperature  and  high  salt  and  sugar  are
unfavourable. But yeasts and molds grow in high salt and high sugar conditions. (Refer Slide Time: 7:31)
Then comes the viruses, so viruses are smallest and simplest microorganism. Actually they are
parasitic and they must need another living organisms to first invade and reproduce. They are
called the living organism, with which they invade first is called a host cell, then after that only
they can multiply. So viruses which infect bacteria are called bacteriophages. so they cannot
infect human beings or other animals.
 On the other hand, several animal viruses known zoonotis, so can infect human beings. So
viruses they cannot themselves reproduce, they before multiplication they need a host cell, so if
those host cells are bacterias they called as, they called bacteriophages. So they would not infectthe human beings but certain animal viruses are there, so they can infect human beings. Actually
in the food also, it requires a live host cell without which they cannot multiply in the food. So the
infections of two categories, one is the baterialphage infection, so they are of starter cultures
which  can  interfere  seriously  with  the  manufacture  of  dairy  products  which  of  cheese,
buttermilk, sauerkraut, pickles, wine, beer and other desirable fermentative products, they may
create a infection.
Although viruses require a live host cell, they cannot multiply in food. So they can remain viable
and infectious for long period of time and even under highly adverse conditions such as drying,
freezing and pasteurization. So in these conditions they, they can remain viable and infectious for
long time. But their occur definitely a hostile so they cannot do on independently, okay. So that is
all about the basic microorganisms, bacteria, yeasts and molds and viruses. So, what are all their
shapes and which kind of foods they they find it favourable conditions for the growth.
(Refer Slide Time: 9:40)
So then we are going to see what are all the factors affecting growth of microorganisms in the
food, right. There are three ways, one is removing or destroying them by trimming, washing,
heating, pickling, by adding chemicals or by encouraging competition between acid and and
alcohol forming organisms. Actually the first one is before going for any thermal processing the
pre-treatment would be refer for example canning operations, so if you want to can any food, so
the previous operations were these, I mean trimming, washing, the heating is nothing but they
call it as a blanching. So, it is done for many reasons, one is to inactivate enzymes as well as to
remove the microorganisms. 
So, these to be done prior to food storage, or food processing, any food processing. So that way
we can reduce the growth of microorganisms and sometimes it is done by using addition of
chemicals or sometimes we play with the pH so that competition between the acid and alcohol
forming organisms because we are going to see what are all the favourable pHs, temperature and
water activity condition for the growth of microorganisms. So we can control in such a way that,
so  the  pH  and  temperature  or  water  activity  is  not  favourable  for  the  growth  of  the
microorganisms. And some of these pre-treatment methods also we can control the growth of
microorganisms. 
And another thing is minimizing contamination from equipment, people and the environment
and from unprocessed food, right. So, though the main two thermal processing equipments were
pasteurization and the sterilization, even after the sterilization, the storage and the handling, forexample we are going for high treatment process, so there may be if the equipment is not
properly washed or properly sterilized before employing the food for further thermal processing,
so that may also contaminate the food.
 And the handling. the personnel should be aware of the good sanitation practises and the
environment everything also affect the growth of microorganism. And minimising microbial
growth on equipment by cleaning and sanitizing and in the product itself by adjusting the storage
temperature, pH and other environmental factors. For example, we do pasteurization process to
kill the pathogenic microorganism but it is the pasteurization temperature is not enough for the, it
only kill the microorganism but if it goes to normal temperature environment then there may
contamination of microorganisms again. 
So those pasteurized products should be refrigerated for further to increase the shelf life of the
food. So these factors also have to be taken care because though we process the food by required
thermal processing, then further storage temperature and pH and environmental factors also
affect the growth of microorganisms and sometimes they serve us a favourable conditions for the
microorganisms to grow, though it was processed thermally before storage. So, based on that the
bacterias were divided into four categories, one Psychrophies, they can grow only at refrigeration
temperatures. The second one is Psychrotrophs; they grow well at refrigeration temperatures but
better at room temperature. 
And the third category is Mesophiles which grow best or or near human body temperature, so
most of the organisms are most of the organisms which found in the food is Mesophiles but grow
well  at  room  temperature.  The  fourth  category  is  Thermophiles.  So  which  has  a  optimum
temperature of 120 to 150 degree Fahrenheit. Theirs spores can survive around 250 degree
Fahrenheit for more than one hour, they grow only at the temperatures about as hot as the human
hand can endure and usually not at all or below the body temperature. So the Thermophiles can
survive at hot conditions and it cannot survive below the body temperature which is nothing but
a 98 degree Fahrenheit, okay.
So there are four categories, Psychrophies, which grows at refrigeration, Psychrotrophs which
which also grow well at refrigeration but better at room temperature, Mesophiles which grow
well at room temperature and it can up to the human body temperature which is nothing but 98degree Fahrenheit, Thermophiles survive at hot conditions but they cannot survive at below body
temperature.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:41)
Though we can classify all the  bacterias  in any of the four categories  but there  are some
exceptions. Some psychrotropic microorganisms grow very well very slowly in foods below
freezing but usually not below 19 degree Fahrenheit. Standard storage temperature for frozen
foods are 0 degree Fahrenheit which does not permit microbial growth. And most psychrotrophs
have difficulty growing above 90 degree Fahrenheit. Most of the foodborne disease causing
microorganisms are Mesophiles. I have already mentioned you. The general rule of thumb is to
store perishable foods below 40 or above 140 degree Fahrenheit to suppress the growth of
microorganisms.
In  the  temperature  range  where  both  mesophilic  and  psychrotrophic  organisms  grow,  the
psychrotrophs grow more rapidly causing spoilage and the same time frequently interfering with
the  growth  of  food  borne  microorganisms.  Actually  if  both  mesophilic  and  psychrotrophic
organisms grow, the temperature window, which is nothing but 41 to 90 degree, that particular
temperature  condition  is  favourable  for  both  mesophilic  as  well  as  psychrotrophic  but  the
psychrotrophics grow more rapidly compared to mesophilic and it causes the spoilage at the
same time  frequently  interfering  with the other foodborne disease organisms. Their rate  of
growth always increases rapidly as the temperature is raised. (Refer Slide Time: 16:23)
So  this  is  just  a  comparison  where  food  poisoning  microorganisms  versus  psychrophilic
microorganisms. So in the temperature range of 50 to 98 degree Fahrenheit, so where food
poisoning  microorganisms  will  have  rapid  growth  rate,  the  same  with  psychrophilic
microorganisms but the temperature range between 38 and 50, food poisoning microorganisms
show slow growth of some type and still you will find rapid growth for the psychrophilic. So,
psychrophilic the temperature range is 38 to 98 degree almost.
So your food poisoning microorganisms found no growth around 14 to 38 degree or 35 degree
Fahrenheit which founds no growth and if we see psychrophilic microorganisms, they found
slow growth rate. But below 14 degree Fahrenheit no growth of both, the slow death happens. So
this is the zone of slow spoilage without any danger to health. It is just a comparison how the
temperature window of its various microorganisms.(Refer Slide Time: 17:37)
So this is another example, growth of bacteria on the chicken. So if you see the 32 degree
Fahrenheit, it finds almost 18 days, so the growth is around 10 to the power of 8, okay. So, but if
you increase the temperature then the growth stops within 8 days and if you further increase to
almost 50 degree Fahrenheit, it is around 2 to 3 days, the maximum is 10 to the power of 9. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:06)
So the next important factor is water activity. So water activity is nothing but a availability of
water to the microorganism. It is only the roughly related to the presence of moisture. So theGMP regulations, GMP regulation is nothing but a good manufacturing practices even I told
about the previous slides, the equipment; how the contamination happens in the equipment. 
So these regulations to be followed, even how to clean the equipment and where to keep the
equipment,  and  the  food  processes  to  be  kept  in  which  area  and  environment  conditions,
everything comes from this GMP regulations that is good manufacturing practices regulations.
For low-acid canned foods defined water activity as the vapour pressure of the food product
divided  by  vapour  pressure  of  the  pure  water  under  identical  conditions  of  pressure  and
temperature. So the regulation defines low-acid foods such as foods other than beverages with a
finished equilibrium pH value greater than 4 point 6, right. 
Low-acid food means normally pH, anyway we are going to see pH is also one of the factors
affecting. So pH 7 means, so that is neutral, so less than 7 that is acid, greater than 7 that is alkali
condition. So in the less than 7 acid conditions also there are two categories, one is low acid and
high acid. So the high acid is below 4 point 6 and low acid food is above 4 point 6 and water
activity greater than point 85. So the regulations defines the low-acid foods, so this is the
favourable conditions for the Clostridium botulinum to grow. So that produces the toxins and
also the diseases, botulinum, so we are going to see anyway, what are all the symptoms and
related food spoilage.
So the conditions for low-acid food is pH should be greater than 4 point 6, at the same time water
activity should be greater than point 85. So if you compare the water activity, bacteria it is high
and then there comes the yeast and the last one is molds. Molds we have already seen. It requires
minimum water as well as the nutrient condition; even with that they can grow. Certain molds
and bacterias can grow on fish immersed in saturated salt solution. So we told that already the
yeasts and molds can grow at high salt, even high sugar environment where the (act) aw is about
point 75 and some molds can grow with the water activity of point 62 to point 65. At these lower
limits, the growth is very slow; if it has to grow in the presence of sugar then the water activity
of about point 1 is itself enough.
The stability of intermediate moisture foods, which is nothing but point 75 to point 9 which also
includes  point  85,  such  as  dried  fruits,  jams  and  soft  moist  pet  foods  depends  upon  the
combination of factors. Though we say that water activity of point 85 is favourable for thebacteria to grow, it also depends upon other factors which is low pH, the pasteurization, chemical
additives, how much, what all are the chemical additives we add and the impervious package. So
it is not only, we can say that if you maintain this particular water activity where spoilage can
occur but it also depends upon other factors. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:55)
So the water activity limits for growth of principal foodborne disease organisms. So the minimal
aw is given; for Salmonella species it is point 945, for Clostridium botulinum it is point 95, the
Clostridium perfringens it is point 93, Staphylococcus aureus point 86 and Vibrio species it is
point 94. So this is we told that minimal aw for the growth of microorganisms. So to toxin to
provide, for example it may also produce the toxins which causes the further diseases, so that
activity may vary little bit from the growth conditions. For example, Staphylococcus, if it can
grow at the water activity of point 86 but it starts producing its toxins at for say point 92 water
activity. So these both are, both may be different. (Refer Slide Time: 22:54)
So and is a pH and initial population count; what is a effect of pH and initial population count on
the food products; growth of microorganisms on the food products. So this we have already
discussed; what is less than 7, equal to 7 and greater than 7. So as we already told, many bacteria
grow best at about neutral pH, they grow poorly or not at all grow below pH 4, alright. The
favourable is 7 but still it can grow in the low-acid food but below 4 it the probability is very
much low. Yeasts and molds therefore predominant in low pH foods where bacteria cannot
compete.
This we have seen from the first slide onwards because the bacteria, yeasts and molds require
opposite conditions to grow. The lactic acid bacteria can grow in high acid foods and actually
produce acid to give a sour milk. So the lactic acid bacteria, so this we might have seen if we
keep the milk at high temperature for particular period, it become a sour milk. So the pickles,
fermented meats and similar products also suffer with lactic acid bacteria. Some strains called
Leuconostoc species which contributes off-flavours to orange juice, orange juice is highly acidic
but the flavour will go if the, if these species are found in that orange juice.
And one more things is, actually the GMP suggest that, that 12 log reduction, we will talk about
that when we talk about the kinetic parameters, we talk about this also that thermal death time.
So they call it as a, for particular temperature to reduce the microorganism count for one log,
right. How long it requires; so that is the time which is nothing but the thermal death time. So normally, the practice what the food microbiologists follow is the 12 log reduction, so how
long, what is at particular temperature, if 12 log reduction happens, to happen 12 log reduction
how long it requires.
So that is the practice they follow but still if the initial count is high then there may be a
possibility for the microorganisms to be there in the food, right. That is what is initial population
count. So this is the major importance to the processor of refrigerated food the shelf life of which
is enhanced by good sanitation. So a high level of spores also increases the possibility that a few
will survive to spoil the heat process to products.
That is what I told, so even though the best practices say 12 log reduction at the particular
temperature, but if we have high level of spores so it is nothing but a probability, right. So we
cannot kill all the spores, it is 90 percentage or 99 point 9 percentage only, even that point 1 or
point 001 percentage can cause the spoilage. So high level of spores increases the possibility that
few of them will survive even after it is thermally processed. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:25)
So these all are pH values of selected foods, so the pH values about 2 point 3 range, so lemon
juice and cranberry sauce; and 3 about berries, peaches, orange juice, apricots, and 4 around
cabbage red, pears, tomatoes, and 4 point 6 this is what we told, low-acid food, so this is the
favourable conditions for Clostridium botulinum. So this can happen in meats, most of thevegetables, starch based foods and protein heavy foods. So 5 is nothing but spaghetti in tomato
sauce, figs, onions, green beans and potatoes. 
6 around tuna, cold fish, beef, pork, evaporated milk, chicken, corn; 7 is around milk and ripe
olive. So if you know whatever the examples I have taken is for chicken, for the bacterial growth
and milk, most of them, like the bacterias, so affected. So their favourable conditions are around
neutral pH and the 4 point 6 is favourable for Clostridium species. 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:34)
The minimal pH minimal for principal foodborne disease organisms is Staphylococcus aureus.
So  if  you  see  this  is  growth  reported  it  but  not  below  this  pH.  So  below  4  no  5  this
Staphylococcus aureus cannot growth, the Salmonella it is 4, Clostridium botulinum there are A,
B, E, F types; A, B types 4 point 8 and Clostridium botulinum type E it is 5. So see point 2, so
the control of pH is very much important, within point 2 we will get different types. And
Clostridium perfringens it is again 5 and Vibrio species it is 4 point 8 and Bacillus species it is 4
point 9. So if you see it is mostly between 4 point 5 to 5. So these are all principal foodborne
disease causing microorganisms. (Refer Slide Time: 28:30)
So the next one is, the next factor affecting is oxygen. So this is essential for growth of some
organisms so based on that we divide into three categories:  one is aerobes, anaerobes  and
microaerophilic. Microaerophilic needs little oxygen, they can grow in little oxygen conditions,
so that means aerobes as well as anaerobes. So strictly aerobes grow on the food surfaces and
cannot grow in the food stored cans or in other evacuated, hermetically sealed containers. So
normally hermetically sealed containers, when we see canning operations so we would be seeing
so how to remove the air which is contained in the cans. 
So because aerobes need oxygen for their growth, they may not grow in the cans, foods stored in
the cans or in other evacuated or hermetically sealed containers. Anaerobes grow only beneath
the surface of the food or inside the containers but when microorganisms are involved, for
example, they need little oxygen mostly are anaerobes. But certain organisms can grow in both
the conditions but in such case if the air is found, their growth will be higher compared to
anaerobic conditions. That means they will be seen in the food surfaces. (Refer Slide Time: 30:00)
So  then  lethal  effects  of  temperature.  The  most  practical  and  effective  means  to  destroy
microorganism is nothing but a thermal processing. So heat it to higher temperatures, so when
you increase the temperature then the growth of the microorganisms will be decreasing. So the
cell reduction occurs just above the maximal growth temperatures, right, growth temperatures in
the  sense,  for  example  it  can  grow  at  say, 42  degree  Fahrenheit,  so  if  you  increase  the
temperature  above  than  that  then  the  cell  reduction  starts  occurring  and  the  rate  of  death
increases markedly as the temperature is raised. 
So, when you increase the temperature, the rate of death increases. There are two main thermal
processing is involved, one is pasteurization, another one is a sterilization. The pasteurization is
nothing but a destruction of vegetative cells of microorganisms which are disease-causing which
consist of a temperature of 140 degree Fahrenheit for about 30 minutes or 161 degree Fahrenheit
for 16 seconds. So this time-temperature combination is also designed by the kinetic processing.
So we will see in the subsequent lectures. So various processing needs, various time temperature
combinations and we say, low temperature less time and high temperature less time and high
temperature high time. 
So there are many possible ways to come up with time-temperature combination based on the
food quality, nutrient quality and bacterial deactivation, so that we will see in the next few
lectures. But here I would like to mention two examples, if we are maintaining 140 degree
Fahrenheit it is about the processing should be done about 30 minutes but if it is 161 degreeFahrenheit it is almost 16 seconds are enough. And yeasts, molds and the vegetative cells of
spoilage bacteria also die at pasteurisation temperature. So remember vegetative cells, if there is,
as  we  have  seen  already,  they  may  form  a  spores  and  they  can  survive  pasteurisation
temperature. 
When the favourable conditions occurs, they may start converting into vegetative cells but one
thing we should remember is after pasteurisation the storage is important; it should be stores in
the refrigerated conditions. The commercial sterility is the destruction and/or inhibition of the
organisms of public health significance as well as the organisms of non-health significance
which could spoil the product.  So, here mostly we take care of the yeast, molds or vegetative
cells but sterilization is the higher order thermal treatment. So here we destruct as well inhibit the
organisms  of  public  health  significance  which  both  disease  causing  otherwise  the  spoilage
organisms of the food. 
So the sterilised product which does not require the further storage conditions, it can survive in
the room temperature about particular time period, maybe 6 months to 1 year. The low-acid
foods require temperature above 212 degree Fahrenheit. Canners process certain canned foods at
240 to 250 degree Fahrenheit, it is about 121 degree centigrade for a considerable length of time
usually 15-20 minutes, sometimes an hour or more. This an hour and more so if you reduce the
temperature, the time-temperature combination, there are many. 
So normally, the low-acid foods requires 121-degree centigrade sterilization temperature for
about 15-20 minutes. As I mentioned you already, there is DT that is nothing but a thermal death
time. So which is nothing but a logarithmic numbers of survivors plotted against the length of the
time so this is time versus log reduction of your microorganisms. So for example, 1, 10, 100,
1000 kind of thing. So one log reduction, so how much time it requires at constant temperature.
So temperature is constant here.  
Subjected to here given temperature, the result is usually a straight line, we normally get, so this
to this, so this is one log reduction from 100 to 10 to reduce it how long how much time it
requires. Actually we say that it is a straight line but there are exceptions where we would not get
this as a straight line. The slope of this line becomes steeper as the temperature is increased, for
example if it is, this is say around 40 degree centigrade. So if I increase 50 then my line becomesthis  because  you  require  very  less  time.  This  I  already  mentioned  so  if  you  increase  the
temperature you would require less time to kill the same population.
Required to kill population at higher temperature, it also takes longer to kill a high population of
organisms. For example, here we put 100, so if I go for 1000 to 10, right. So it requires longer
time, because my initial starts with 100 then I may require 15 minutes, initially itself if I have 10
to the power of 3 number of spores then it requires more time. The rate of thermal destruction is
greater in foods with high water activity then in those with low water activity; the rate of thermal
destruction.  So  one  example  is  recommended  pasteurisation  process  to  destroy  Salmonella
species in liquid egg albumen prior to freezing, before freezing they do pasteurization. So that is
if we maintain 60 degree for 3 point 5 minutes.
So if it liquid egg, whereas for dried egg albumen it is the say 140 degree or 60 degree centigrade
to 158 or 70 degree for several days. So that means if we have high water activity, the rate of
thermal destruction is higher compared to low water activity. So it can be, if it is a liquid egg it is
3.5 minutes but if it is dried egg albumen, it takes several days so the temperature also have to be
bit higher. The presence of, presence or absence of organic matter, oil or fat, pH, strain of
organisms, quality of available nutrients, age of the culture; so these all also affect the time
temperature combination.
For example, so not only I need to see how much log reduction I will be able to get in a
particular time temperature combination so if I heat that particular temperature, that long hours
so what happens to my nutrients in the food and what is the pH alteration during the time
temperature combination, what is the strain of microorganisms I have what is the age of culture.
So everything else is also matter when we fix the time temperature combination. And one more
thing is another thing what we think is like we always talk about the higher temperature.
So what happens if we store it in a chilling because I already told the pasteurisation, after
pasteurisation we need to preserve it in the refrigeration temperature. So what happens during
chilling?  Chilling  to  temperatures  below  the  growth  range  but  above  freezing  stops  the
reproduction, but kills few cells except for extremely sensitive organisms such as vegetative cells
of Clostridium perfringens. So it stops reproduction but kills few cells only but there are some
certain sensitive organisms which still survives even at its chilling temperatures. I already toldthough we give example but one thing is the probability of the spores present in the food and also
there are many factors which affects and sometimes the closely related species also will have
different effect in the particular temperature.
The freeze kills part of microbial population within a few hours and storage continues to be
lethal at much slower rate which depends upon the nature of the food. For example, rapid drop in
aerobic plate count occurred in orange juice, so if I keep orange juice in the chilling conditions
then aerobic plate count we are going to see; this is nothing but a qualitative count of the
microorganisms. So there is a drop in aerobic plate count in the orange juice. So actually
bacterial spores die very slowly in the chilling temperature, if at all, during freezing and frozen
storage, for example, the vegetative cells of Clostridium perfringens generally all die but the
spores survive. 
I  already  told  vegetative  cells  may  die  here  but  spores  may  survive  even  at  the  chilling
temperature. And Staphylococcus aureus and related organisms still survive well in the chilling
temperature range. Actually freezing is not a dependable means to destroy microorganisms since
some cells of the original population almost always survive. So the freezing comes like, before
freezing normally we do either of the thermal processing; pasteurisation or sterilization, mostly
pasteurisation. So as I already told, even after pasteurisation there are many factors which affects
the survival of the microorganisms after the thermal processing as well. So freezing is not a
favourable condition to destroy microorganisms. It may be used for storage, further storage after
the particular thermal processing is employed. (Refer Slide Time: 40:32)
So what is this aerobic plate count, so this is aerobic plate count means it is a fraction of the
bacterial flora that is able to grow as a visible colonies under the arbitrary test conditions
provided in the time period allowed. So particular time period, how much visible colonies I am
able to see at particular test conditions. So if the test conditions are changed then there may be
you will get the other number of counts. So the high APC, high aerobic plate count reveals; so it
is the one of the measuring technique.
 Failure of sorting, trimming, washing, destroying operations to remove or destroy bacteria from
raw ingredients adequately. As I told, for example if we take canning operations so before that
they do some of the pre-treatment; one of the pre-treatment is blanching, right.  So although it
was done to inactivate the enzymes, sometimes it is also kills certain microorganisms. So if we
still find after those operations, if we still find APC count high then that means that was not done
properly though if it is meant to reduce the microorganisms count then it should not give high
APC.  And  inadequate  heat  processing;  sometimes  what  happens,  though  we,  the  time
temperature combination is not adequate enough to reduce the microorganisms to the particular
log level. 
And insanitary equipment, particularly near at the end of the process, near at the end of the
process. I already told though after processing is done, even GMP regulations are just that near
the walls also you need to maintain the sterilization temperature or pasteurisation temperature.So there is a possibility, the temperature is lower than the particular processing temperature then
there may be a possibility of the contamination. And the food has reached or is approaching the
end of its refrigerated shelf life and sometimes what happens is, they say that even it should be
used at the refrigerated storage but the condition is 3 days or 4 days, right.
So at that time also we need to probably check in the refrigerated conditions also what is the time
period or what is the shelf life of the refrigerated product. The food has been sorted at or stored it
or above room temperature for too long. For example, if we see, if something says that, if we go
for shop and buy some refrigerated food products, if they say that it should be kept at refrigerated
temperature. We come home and we keep it some 6 hours in the normal temperature then we
remember and keep it in the refrigerator so that storage in the room temperature at 6 hours also
counts, also effects on some of the microorganisms which grow on the food.
The food is at least partly decomposed; partly decomposed in the sense even though it is already
spoiled but we store it in refrigeration that will not improve anything. The refrigeration is
nothing but we can restrict the growth of microorganisms, if already there it cannot do anything
about it. So one is Coliform Bacteria;  so this  available  in all the dairy products  so if the
conditions are not maintained properly then this spoilage occurs due to this bacteria. 
One thing I would like to mention is here is the high, whatever the points we discuss, it also lies
with the manufacturers, for example if it has to be stored under refrigerated condition so it
should be legibly written in the carton, I mean the label, and also used by date is very much
important because one things what we discussed is an end of its refrigerated shelf life. Even in
the refrigeration condition, it cannot be stored or most one year or two years, right, there is a use
by date for that, even for refrigerated products. (Refer Slide Time: 44:36)
The  next  one  is  food  poisoning,  human  illness  caused  by  foodborne  microorganisms  are
popularly referred as a food poisoning. Apart from illness due to food allergy or food sensitivity,
we have this right for example I am allergic towards a high fat food or I am allergic to high oily
food, so apart from these two they may be divided into two major classes, one is food infection,
another one is food intoxication. The food infection results when foods are contaminated with
pathogenic, invasive, and food poisoning bacteria are eaten, right the bacteria itself we had it and
these bacteria then proliferate in the human body, mostly intestine and eventually cause illness.
So I have eaten the bacteria itself which causes the disease.
 The second one is food intoxication which happens, for example the microorganisms grows in
the  food  and  we  have  discussed,  right  certain  pH  there  is  a  toxins  are  produced  by  the
microorganisms. So the toxins were produced by the microorganisms so I have eaten those toxic
substances, right.  So the  second  one is  the  ingestion  of preformed  toxic  substances  which
accumulate during the growth of certain bacterial types in food, so that is food intoxication, the
earlier one is food infection. The period of time between the consumption of contaminated foods
and the first appearance of my illness is nothing but a incubation period, for example, morning I
have eaten, after two hours I started vomiting. So the in between time is nothing but a incubation
period. It ranges from less than one hour to more than three days, depending upon the causative
organisms or the toxic product. (Refer Slide Time: 46:27)
So certain things we discuss here, as I told this is botulism, the disease, the etiologic agent which
causes is the Clostridium botulinum. So there are A, B, E, F type toxin. So usually the incubation
period is 1 or 2 days, range 12 hours to more than 1 week. So the symptoms are swelling, double
vision,  difficulty  in  speech,  occasionally  nausea,  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.  In  early  stages,
constipation and subnormal temperature, respiration becomes difficult, often followed by death
from paralysis of muscles of respiration. So this is a dangerous one and Staphylococcal food
poisoning, so they caused by Staphylococcal enterotoxin, so the incubation period is 1 to 6 hours,
again nausea, vomiting, cramps and temperature subnormal during acute attack, maybe elevated
later, rapid recovery usually within a day. 
Another is Salmonellosis, I already told it is spread by cockroaches, flies and specific infection
by salmonella species, average about 18 hours, range from 7 to 17 hours. Again abdominal pain,
diarrhoea, fever, frequent vomiting, then during of illness is 1 day to 1 week. Then shigellosis
(bacillary dysentery), so this caused by Shigella species, usually 24 to 48 hours, again here
abdominal  cramps, fever, chills,  diarrhoea  and headache,  nausea,  dehydration,  these  are all
symptoms. And Escherichia coli, I already told coli bacteria, this is Escherichia coli serotypes
associated with infant and adult infections.
So usually 10 to 12 hours, headache, fever, and diarrhoea, vomiting, duration is few days, it will
be rewind. Clostridium perfringens food poisoning, so the agent is clostridium  perfringens,
usually 10 to 12 hours, so abdominal cramps, vomiting is very rare, nausea is another symptom,meat and poultry products usually involved this kind of bacterias, rapid recovery is possible.
Then vibrio species, it is again virus, usually 12 to 14 hours; abdominal  pain, and watery
diarrhoea, usually, nausea and vomiting, mild fever also so the recovery period is around 2 to 5
days.
(Refer Slide Time: 49:11)
Then the food spoilage, actually the problem facing by the food industry is spoilage by the
bacteria, though I have already told the thermal processing applied in two folds, one is spoilage
bacteria to control growth of spoilage bacteria, another one is disease causing bacteria, alright.
So the spoilage is of every food industry concern which is not hazardous to health. The chilling
slows spoilage, proper freezing, drying, canning and pickling arrest it completely. Chilling I
already told, so we need to employ a thermal processing and further the growth is controlled by
chilling and proper freezing, drying, canning also do it completely to arrest the food spoilage
microorganisms. 
Chilled foods must be transported to the customers before spoilage microorganisms make them
unfit  for  consumption.  I  already  told  if  some  food  product  should  be  kept  at  refrigerated
condition, so it should be transferred immediately, so in between the transport and storage at
maximum time without the chilling temperature, also makes the food to spoil. Refrigerated foods
products are convenient to use have a “close to fresh” image. As we already told, the refrigeratedconditions are maintained for safety but it is most of the time to maintain the product quality, so
it gives a “close to fresh” look.
The optimum storage temperature is 33 degree Fahrenheit or as close to freezing as possible,
however most refrigerated cases are holding near 45 or even 45 degree Fahrenheit. There are 3
things we need to remember, even at refrigerated food, first of all we have to assume pathogenic
organisms  are  always  present  in  the  food  product.  The  second  one  is  the  refrigeration
temperatures may slow or prevent replication of most of the pathogenic microorganisms, but still
some will continue to multiply, example is psychrotophs, we have already seen how even at
refrigerated temperature.
 Thirdly, manufactures should expect some temperature abuse of the foods during storage and
distribution; this includes handling at the customer level as well. So manufactures always need to
take care, for example, so from the shop to home or where ever from the place and there is a
transportation and storage also there.  So they should take care of that temperature level before it
reaches to consumer. 
(Refer Slide Time: 51:47)
Canned foods, the shelf life of canned foods results from the destruction of microorganisms
capable of growth within the container during normal handling and storage. They follow GMP
regulation for low-acid foods that is I already told, low acid food the condition is pH 4 point 6above and water activity is point 85, most of this condition is most favourable for Clostridium
botulinum. So they have to follow GMP regulations and they reduce the spore level in the food,
as a general rule, food with a high spore level requires more retort time and temperature in the
same similar operations.
We have already told, if we maintain the say, for example, there two cases, one with high spore
and another with low spore, low spore require low time, low temperature compared to higher
one. Assuming, same the incidence of spoilage will be higher for canned food with a high initial
spore level. The next one is the follow good sanitation and good container handling techniques
so everything should follow GMP regulations and cooling as well as post cooling period.
The  important  thing  is,  even  though  we  employ  pasteurization  or  sterilization  at  a  high
temperature immediately the product should be cooled to normal room temperature because it
reduces  the  possibility  of  growth  of  the  thermophiles  organisms  because  the  thermophiles
survived higher temperature. It should be cool to normal room temperature to avoid the growth
of thermophiles. And also maintain good seams on cans because the air tight container should
maintain the perfect sealing to control the growth of the microorganisms, okay. 
(Refer Slide Time: 53:37)
So I have showed one particular table which is taken from the prevention of microbial and
parasitic hazard associated with processed food, a guide for the food processor and pH value as
well as the water activity value were taken from some of the references and the rest are the books
and references which are used in the particular lecture. So that is all for today, so tomorrow we
will see about next lecture. Thank you.