Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
Lecture 18
Advanced Separation Processes
Good morning everyone. Today we are going to see about advanced separation processes. So,
the subsequent two classes also closely related to advance separation processes. So, today we
are going to see about the fundamentals of separation processes and what are all the advanced
separation processes? So, in which we are going to concentrate on membrane separation
processes.  In  subsequent  lectures  we  will  be  seeing,  what  are  all  the  major  membrane
separation processes, and what they are used in food industry, and for food processing?
So, it is a alternative to thermal processing but, though the courses about thermal processing
of foods. So, we have also seen other non-thermal technologies in few lectures before. And,
also  we  discussed  detailed  about  microwave  ohmic  heating  as  well  as  radio  frequency
heating.  And,  so  this  another  three  lectures  we  will  be  discussing  about,  the  advance
separation processes which are employed in the food industry. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:47)
So, the first one we suppose to see is what is separation process and few basics about this. So,
if any industry the main aim is to process raw materials and convert them into products. So,
this is my process so I have a raw materials, so which are converted into products. But, so
here my process requires my raw materials in some form. For example, so we take a size ofraw materials so we need certain size of raw materials. Or, for example, we can say that, if
my size is too big so the contact surface area will be very much small. 
So, that case we will process raw materials, the unit process is nothing but a size reduction.
So, after size reduction I do not require certain size of the raw material. I need certain range
of raw materials, range of size. So, in that case so I would go for a separation processes. From
the separation process I will select the size range of the raw materials which will further fed
into process. So, in that case my separation is employed in the upstream of the processes. 
And, what happens in the downstream is for example if i take A plus B as a raw material and
I will convert them in to C plus D so this is my product. So, in the C plus D my interest
would be on the D only, I would want only D. So, in that case also I will go for separation
processes to separate D from C. So, conventionally your separation can be from upstream
side or from downstream side, so based on their requirements. And sometimes what happens
this processes itself a separation processes. And most of the industries the separation process
itself a main process. 
So, this is a unit operation unit operation in the sense where, we do not involve any chemical
reactions. The aim is just to separate, solutes from solvents or solute from a solute mixtures.
So, for example, if we consider the waste water treatment, where the membrane separation is
also very much famous. So, there may be three stages, the first stage would be coagulation or
flocculation, the second stage would be of oxidation ponds, the third would be of membrane
process. This way also the separation process can be done. 
So, the main processes itself a separation processes. So, there may be a series of stages, the
first stage I would be doing it in using the coagulation technique, the second stage would be
of oxidation pond, the third stage would be of membrane separation process. But, in the food
industry  where  we are  going  to concentrate,  so  the  major  processes  itself  a membrane
separation process. So, the example would be the clarification of juices. It is nothing but the,
to get the clear juice solution, clarification of juices. So, this is little introduction about the
membrane processes. (Refer Slide Time: 06:53)
For example, how do I measure the separation? So, there is a parameter called alpha AJ, we
call it as a separation factor. So, this is nothing but X1i upon X1j upon X2i X2j. So, this 1 and
2 are streams, and i and j are species. So, when alpha ij is equal to 1, so then there is no
separation at all that is obvious. Because, the stream 1 have i upon j that and stream 2 have I
upon j. If it is 1 then they both are equal, so then we will not any separation, so if alpha ij, so
there may be a two situation 1 is less than 1, another 1 is greater than 1. 
If it is less than 1 the stream 1 is concentrated in j and 2 is concentrated in i. So, that means so
this is high and it is also high and so that your denominator would be dominating, so you will
have alpha ij as less than 1. So, the greater than 1 is exactly opposite, stream 2 is concentrated
in j and 1 is concentrated in i. So, this is the separation factor with which we can say whether
the separation is possible or not or which species in which stream is concentrated. So, then
for the separation so what is requirement. 
So, for example, this is the separation process. So we send feed, so the feed is converted into
the retentate and permeate. So, this both we call them as a product. So, this separation can be
done using membrane as well. So, membrane separation as well, or if you take any common
processes, so you have a membrane separation processes you have a feed you have a product.
So, this separation to do then I need to use some other external agency. So, how do i separate
something from the feed as I wanted? So, that can be used, that can be done using energy or
any material. 
So, for example, if you take the drying technology, so in the drying technology to remove the
moisture or separate the moisture from the product, so what we are using is thermal energy.So, and for example in food industry another just we told the example is clarification of juice.
So, for that we use coagulating agent. So, what it does is it forms the coagulation with the
undissolved solid and that gets settled in the bottom. Then your clear juice will be collected at
the top. So, here the separation is done using a material, so in the drying of food products the
removal of moisture is done using a thermal energy. So, to separate the desired product from
the feed so we need to use either energy or a material. 
And it is like the similar phenomena you might have studied in the chemistry. So you use the
catalyst to reduce the activation energy of the reactants. So, here also so the energy or the
material whatever you use, so that helps in exceeding the activation energy of the separation;
so this is my external agent. And, also the separation works based on the two principles, so
one is the equilibrium governed operation, the second one is rate governed operation. 
In the equilibrium governed operations, so the product face as well as the feed face or in
equilibrium,  in  the  rate  governed  operation  rate  of  the  physical  transport  of  species  is
responsible for the separation processes. So here in the equilibrium governed both, feed as
well as product faces are very much important. The equilibrium governed we can say as a
distillation so the rate governed or normal our membrane separation process what is of our
interest. 
So, this is the basic about what is separation, and what is a basic principle of separation and
what are all the major categories, equilibrium governed as well as rate governed? So, this is
the basic about the separation processes. So, we will see now the other things what are all the
fundamentals of separations processes. And, what are all the advance separation processes in
that we are going to concentrate.(Refer Slide Time: 13:54)
So, here is the fundamentals, the basics of separation processes used in the food industry. So,
as I told earlier the food industry processes itself a separation processes. So, example is
nothing but a clarification of juice. So, how it is been done, the plant carbohydrate, pectin,
starch, and proteins so, these makes the colloidal suspension in the freshly extracted fruit
juice. In the freshly extracted fruit juice, you will find all of them in the colloidal stage. So,
we used the pectinol as a enzyme, so as I told it is a material we used for the separation. 
The pectinol enzyme is widely used for better juice recovery as well as the clarification f fruit
juices. What it does is, it breaks the pectin here and into soluble form. Thereby, freeing the
suspended particles, which settle down and leaves the juice clear. So, if we add the freshly
extracted fruit juice which contains pectin. If we pectinol enzymes that clarifies the fruit
juice. So, amylases are also used to remove protein as well as starch from the fruit juices.
This one example and another example for the separation processes which uses energy is
home drying of vegetables and fruit. So, if we keep it for sun drying using the solar energy
the vegetables and fruit gets dried, so that is the using energy. So, here separation processes is
done using a material, here the separation processes is done using a energy.(Refer Slide Time: 15:40)
The equilibrium governed separation process are drying we just discussed. The water vapors
from a solid material are removed by using a vapor stream. So, here the vapors stream the
important parameters are temperature, relative humidity and thermos physical properties of
the vapors stream as well as the temperature the physical properties of the solid is also
important when we are doing the drying. Drying is nothing but a equilibrium governed
separation process. 
And, the driving force for physical transport of species is generally a gradient of chemical
potential. So, based on chemical potential gradient only the separation occurs here. The rate
governed  separation  processes  example  is  membrane  separation  process.  So,  here  the
concentration gradient, pressure gradient, temperature gradient, and electrochemical potential
gradient are used as a driving force.
So,  the  first  separation  processes  is  nothing  but  a  osmosis.  So,  first  we  will  see  the
fundamental separation process. So, then we discussed about the advance separation process.
So, in the advance separation process we are going to concentrate only on the membrane
separation process. (Refer Slide Time: 17:17)
So, the osmosis is a basics separation processes so, this is observed when the solution is
separated from the solvent by a semipermeable membrane. So, the semipermeable membrane
here in the sense it permits only the solvent. The difference in osmotic pressure across the
membrane drives the transport of the solvent. The osmatic pressure is a colligative property.
The colligative property means the property of the solutions that depends on the ratio of the
number of solute particles to the number of solvent molecules in the solution. 
But, they are not depend on the nature chemical species. So, osmatic pressure here is a
colligative property that means it depends upon the number of solutes, in the number of
solvent molecules in the solution. And, also it is a function of concentration, so that is where
we told in earlier  lecture  concentration  gradient  pressure gradient  as well. So, then  the
concentration gradient of the solvent is the main driving force in the osmosis.(Refer Slide Time: 18:23)
So, the solvent flows from the solvent side to the solution side until the solvent activity
becomes  a, almost  equal  in  the  both  the  sides, also  the  hydrostatic  pressure  difference
between two sides known as the osmatic pressure. So, for example, so I have a system where
I employ a semi permeable membrane. So, initially both the side, the one side the solvent is
there. So, another side there is a solution with solute molecule as well as solvent. 
So, after the separation happens because the semipermeable membrane we told that it permits
the solvent molecule to flow from the higher concentration to lower concentration. So, after
sometimes what happens is we will see a solvent increase in the other side. So, this side you
will find less solvent. So, this height is contributing to the pressure so that is what we call it
as a hydrostatic pressure difference between two sides so this is h so rho g H. So, this is
nothing but a hydrostatic pressure between two sides which is known as a osmatic pressure. 
If the initial concentration of the solute is more in the solution side, so that means solvent
concentration is very low. Then more solvent will flow in from the solvent side to equalize
the solvent activity, on the both the sides resulting in more osmatic pressure different.  So that
means, if the initial concentration of solute is more in this side than more solvent will be
diffusing through the membrane so in that case this h will be higher than the case what we
discuss. So, in that case so you will have a higher osmatic pressure difference.(Refer Slide Time: 20:39)
So, then another basic operation so, this also we are going to see in detail about them
advanced  membrane  separation  processes  as  well.  So,  here  we  will  just  see  the  basic
definition and what happens in that reverse osmosis. So, the pressure is applied on the
solution side externally so that the osmatic pressure is over comes and the solvents are forced
out of the solution side. So, what we have done in the osmosis is, so from the solvent side the
solvent moves to the solution side. 
So, here we are developing a osmatic pressure. So, now the externally the pressure is applied
so which has to overcome this osmatic pressure, if that is the case then solvent back diffuses
to the from the solution side to solvent side so that is what reverse osmosis is. Pressure is
applied on the solution side externally so that osmatic pressure is overcome the solvents are
forced out of the solution side. 
The  throughput  of the  process  and  the  quality  of the product depends  on the porosity,
morphology and the thickness of the membrane what we are using in the reverse osmosis.
The separation of lower molecular weights species is possible in the reverse osmosis. Mostly
it is used in the desalination of water. Actually the salt with high osmotic pressure, the
operating pressure in the feed side of a reverse osmosis pressure is extremely high, because,
they  have  a  high  osmatic  pressure  to  overcome  that  we  need  to  apply  higher  external
pressure, in that case the feed side operating pressure is extremely high in reverse osmosis. 
The deposition near the membrane surfaces leads to concentration boundary layer. Once the
membrane separation starts the concentration of solutes gets builds in the membrane surface
that further leads to concentration boundary layer.(Refer Slide Time: 22:38)
The next basic separation processes is dialysis, so here the two liquids streams are separated
by a permeable membrane. The specific set of solutes from feed side are permeated through
the membrane to the dialysate side. So, here the permeation of solute is possible from the
feed side to dialysate  side. The transport  here is affected  by the concentration  gradient
between the two streams what we are using. And, the rate of solutes through the membrane is
a critical parameter in the dialysis. 
So, the example in the food industry is demineralization of milk, so for that we use a dialysis
operation. So, these are all basics, so osmosis, reverse osmosis and another is dialysis, so
these are all basic separation operations. So, in that still this reverse osmosis will come under
the category of advanced. So, this is basics separation processes, so the advance separation
processes  are,  so  all  membrane  processes,  so  which  includes  Ro  micro  filtration  and
ultrafiltration and Nano filtration. 
So, all comes under the category of membrane separation processes, this is the advance
separation processes dialysis. If it is done using the electrical input then we call it as a electro
dialysis. So, that also advanced electro dialysis, so this also comes under the category of
advanced  separation processes. Apart  from that there is  an another advanced separation
processes is called chromatographic separation processes. So these are all comes under the
category of advance separation processes. 
Anyway in the third lecture which talks about the electro dialysis and also we are going to
intensely  concentrate  about  the  all  membrane  separation  processes  Ro  microfiltration,ultrafiltration, as well as nano-filtration in terms of food industry, what is there used in the
food industry. So, chromatographic separation I will just give the very brief introduction.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:24)
So, the chromatographic separation so this is also called advanced separation processes. So,
this can be done in many ways for example liquid chromatography and gas chromatography
and gas liquid and many variations are there. I will just introduce you about the liquid
chromatography what exactly happens. So, here how we separate the components is based on
the  mobile  and  stationary  phase.  For  example,  my  solvent  is  pumped  and  sent  to  the
chromatographic column. We call it as a column, this is chromatographic column. 
So, here the feed is injected in this line, so feed is injected in between the chromatographic
column and solvent tank. So, then further it goes to detector, so this detector normally we use
UV disable spectro photometer. So, this will give me absorbance versus time, to measure the
absorbance then I will discuss about the calibration curve.  So, this is detector and it further
goes to the flow meter to measure the solvent flow rate. So, what happens here is feed is
injected in between so the feed normally a pulsed feed. 
So, which is about 1 milligram per ml with flow rate of around 1.5 ml per minute. So, the
total volume handle would be around 10 micro liter. So, then sometime what happens, this
chromatographic column, itself kept in a oven to maintain the temperature. So, that also
happens, the most common material used in the column is nothing but weak cation exchange
materials. So, the particles size is about 5 micron and the pore size is about 100 Armstrong
and length is about 150 mm so, then ID is around 4.6 mm. So,  this  is  typical  material  which  is  used  in  the  column  and  also  how  it  detects  the
component. The separation how it happens is, so first we take a material. For example, in the
feed contains more than 1 solute. So, each solute will come at different timings, for example,
in X axis we have a time so 1 minute, 2 minute, 3 minute, 4 minute, so for example, solute A
shows up. So, this is absorbance so the detector what you use is UV spectro photometer so it
measure the absorbance. 
So, I will take out here the solution then go for at 1 minute various time intervals, for
example, 1 minute, 2 minute, 3 minute, 4 minute, I will just take the sample here at this
outside of this column. Then i will go for the UV absorbance and i will get the peak at 1 and
2 and sometimes 3 and 4. So, this is nothing but different material A B C D material. So, that
means at different intervals different materials comes out of the column. So, that is the way
so based on the mobility then it gets the separation. 
So, how do we get the concentration of the solute from the absorbance is we supposed to do
the calibration curve. Calibration curve in the sense, for example, if i identify after 1 minute
my A is showing up. So, A I will prepare various concentration, for example, 0.1 milligrams
per Marlboro Lights, then 0.2, 0.3 like that I will prepare. Then, I will get the concentration
verses absorbance. So, I will get the calibration curve. 
So from that calibration curve I would be able to tell at 1 minute if my absorbance is this
peak so how much is the concentrate A at 1 minute? So, after 2 minute your A will not be
sowing up, your B will be showing up. So, at the time same calibrations curve I will do it for
B concentration verses absorbance and C also same thing. So, from this I will be able to
know which time which material is coming out of the column and what is its concentration.
So, from the calibration curve I will be able detect my various components in the feed
material. 
So, this is the basics about the chromatographic separation anyway we are not going in too
detail about the chromatography separation. We are only going to concentrate about the
membrane separation processes. Which are reverse osmosis, micro filtration ultra filtration as
well as Nano filtration and also we will discuss about the electro dialysis. (Refer Slide Time: 32:06)
So, in the membrane separation process the major usage is in dairy as well as beverage
industry. And, due to newer membrane materials and design so this field is very much useful
in the food industries. And also the concentration and fractionation are two major areas of the
interest in the membrane separation process. So, better quality products with minimum waste
generation  and higher energy efficiency  would be the goal of the membrane  separation
process in food industry. 
For example, I used sterilization, I used thermal energy. So, I have done it whatever seen in
last 10, 15 lectures. So, the sterilization is done using a thermal energy. But here we use a
filtration,  the  thermal  energy. So,  we  are,  here  we  are  going  to  use  the  ultrafiltration
technology which also filters the viruses. So, in that case I am not using a thermal energy,
which will also cook my product. The product gets thermally damaged, if I do it using
thermal energy. But, in case of microfiltration so can remove the viruses without heating the
product. 
So,  that  means  so  minimum  waste  generation  as  well  as  the  quality  of  the  product  is
enhanced.  In  the  case  of  concentration  the  membrane  separation  processes  replace  the
thermal process result in energy efficiency. So, if you concentrate on their area of interest to
concentration. So, that is what I told the thermal  process is replaced  by the membrane
separation processes. In case of fractionation membrane separation processes resulted in a
minimum waste generation. 
As well as the recycling of the by product is possible in the fractionation. But, that is not
possible if I use a thermal energy. For example, I am removing the moisture using the thermalenergy. The moisture gets evaporated and it goes out of the system. But, in case of the
membrane separation processes whatever permeate or retantiate you get. So, based on desired
1, sometimes your retantiate may be of desirable or sometimes your permeate will be of the
desired product. 
So, based on the desired product the undesired product can be recycled as a byproduct. But,
that I cannot do in the normal thermal processing. The cold sterilization of liquid food
materials, with improves shelf life and retention of flavor and nutrient is the major advantage
of the membrane separation process as I told. So, I will be retaining the flavor and nutrients
in case of ultra filtration. So, where my microorganisms get removed at the same time my
flavor and nutrients of the food is retained.
(Refer Slide Time: 35:09)
The application wise the membrane separation processes in food industry water desalination
as well as purification, cold sterilization of beverages and recovery and fractionation of
proteins from whey. So, this is very important application of membrane separation process in
the food industry. And, also the clarification of food juices wines and beer and removal of
bacteria from water. 
And, effluent treatment for removal of heavy metals, organic materials. Separation of oil and
water emulsions, this also used in food industry enormously. Removal of volatile organic
components from air. These are common applications but, these few applications are very
much used in the food industry.(Refer Slide Time: 36:00)
So, then membrane operation mode and membrane materials. The size of the membrane pores
very much important. Based on that we will have variety of membrane separation processes
as  I  told  earlier  microfiltration,  ultrafiltration,  reverse  osmosis  and  nano-filtration.  The
microfiltration the separation of micro molecules and particles that range in size from 1 to 10
micro meter that is nothing but a microfiltration. 
The separation of macromolecules by molecular mass so that is generally from 5 to 500 KDa
kilo Dalton. So, that is nothing but a ultrafiltration. So, a membrane with the cut of 5 KDa so
that  retains  90  percentage  of  macromolecules  with  molecular  mass  of  5  KDa.  The
ultrafiltration finds wider application in the whey protein concentration and fractionation.
And reverse osmosis finds application in the desalination of water and nano-filtration lies
between that of ultrafiltration and reverse osmosis so based on the application.(Refer Slide Time: 37:12)
So, the most common membranes used are polymers or inorganic materials. So, the cost of
inorganic materials are very much high compare to polymeric materials. Due to the instinct as
well as the steam sterilizability and there are different modules with which the membranes
separation process can be operated. One is hallow fibre modules, spiral wound plate and
frame as well as the tubular module. The spiral wound module has the highest specific area
area per unit volume that is what we supposed want to get the return it. 
And, which has the limited  application with the solution containing suspended particles
because it cannot be used for the solution which has suspended particles. The phenomenon of
concentration polarization results in low acceptability of membrane technology in continuous
process. This concentration polarization word is nothing but, so I have a membrane, so here
the solute gets retantate and permeate moves out of the membrane. So, after certain time
retantate gets concentrated. 
So, its forms a another resistance for further flow of the feed through the membrane. So, that
is nothing but a concentration polarisation. So, the phenomenon of concentration polarisation
results in low acceptability of membrane technology in the continuous processes. Because in
the batch processes we know exactly the volume, so based on that the membrane can be
designed. But, in the continuous flow it is the flow the operation is continuous. So, since it is
continuous the concentrate of reatantate gets builded up in the membrane surface. So that is
very much unwanted.(Refer Slide Time: 39:01)
And the tangential filtration is carried out, where flow of liquid is parallel to the membrane.
So as we said earlier so, this is my membrane process. So, where your feed is in here, so you
will have the permeate, so then you will also have retentiate. Permeates is which passes
through the membrane, retentiate is what gets retained in the membrane. The filtration is
carried out were the flow feed is parallel to membrane. 
For example, so if you have a membrane module like your flow of feed is also the same
direction, the parallel to the membrane. This is the parallel line, the cross flow of permeate is
perpendicular to the membrane surface. To improve the filtration rate high cross flow velocity
is maintained and this results in reduced thickness of the concentration polarization layer. The
cross  flow  is  perpendicular  to  the  membrane  surface,  so  there  is  a  possibility  for  the
concentration polarization, but if we maintained the high cross flow velocity that can be
avoided. (Refer Slide Time: 40:16)
The transmembrane pressure is the major driving force for the movement of solution across
the membrane. And, the concentration of solute increases at this mass of solute is deposited
on the membrane surface we just discussed. The concentration gradient on the feed side of
the  membrane  with  maximum  concentration  at  the  membrane  surface.  So,  maximum
concentration happens at the membrane surface. And the solute cake or solute layer, solute
cake in the sense in the case of membrane filtration. 
Or solute layer in case of ultrafiltration  results in higher membrane  resistance  and thus
decline  in  the  permeate  flux  across  the  membrane.  So,  that  means  the  concentration
polarization further acts as a resistance and this decline in the permeate flux across the
membrane. The flow of liquid is tangential to the membrane surface, and this flow attempts
to reduce the thickness of the cake. This we discussed in the previous slide itself.(Refer Slide Time: 41:17)
The increase in solute concentration may also increase the viscosity, which may affect the
transmembrane flux. And irreversible fouling of the membrane needs cleaning as well as the
back flushing to restore the original flux. The fouling may be reduced by optimising process
parameters, design parameters as well as membrane materials. The fouling is nothing but a
concentration of the retentate in the membrane surface. So which acts as a extra resistance for
the permeate. 
The  diffusion  based  membrane  processes  which  is  nothing  but  a  pervaporation  where
concentration difference cross the membrane is the driving force. Here it is a transmembrane
pressure for other membrane separation operation. The membrane separation operation is
generally operated batch or continuous mode, both are possible. The batch, the volume of the
solution decreases and the concentration of solute increase with the time. So, the solution gets
processes and concentration of solute increases with the time. But in the continuous mode the
concentration of solute retentate remains constant.(Refer Slide Time: 42:28)
Then  based  on  membrane  materials  wise  the  cellulose  acetate  and  synthetic  polymer
membrane as well as composite and ceramic membranes are available. And cellulose acetate
membrane provides high permeate flux as well as it is easy to manufacture. It breaks down at
higher temperature and sensitive to chemical. So, that is the disadvantage of the cellulose
acetate membrane. So this is the older one. 
When the membrane  separation  processes started the  cellulose acetate  membrane  where
membrane were used, after the polymer area got picked up and we moved slowly on to the
synthetic polymer membranes. So, ultra filtration polymer membranes made for polyamide,
polyacrylonitrile,  nylon as  well  as  the polysulfones  have been  used  for better  chemical
resistance. 
And ceramic and composite membranes made from carbon, zirconium oxide, or alumina have
the advantage of cleaning and sanitation due to their inert nature. So, this will not take place
in the any reactions so their inert nature so they are very much wanted were your membrane
should not react with the feed processed.(Refer Slide Time: 43:44)
Now, we are going to see about the different modules, tubular hollow fibre membrane platen
frame as well as the spiral wound module. The ceramic membranes are generally assembled
in a tubular modules. If the material is membrane materials ceramic easy replacement of the
membrane and cleaning of the membrane surface and no need for any costly pretreatment of
the feed is the advantage of tubular membranes. Tubular membrane are located inside the
tube and the diameter is about 5 to 15 millimetre. 
And, because of the size of the membrane surface, plugging of tubular membrane is not easy.
This is a disadvantage and packing density is low, packing density is how much membranes
you can pack in a single tube. So which results in the high capital cost per module. And, high
energy cost per unit of liquid treated. And low surface area per unit volume so, packing
density is also low and surface area per unit volume is also low. Necessity of high liquid flow
rate to maintain turbulence in the module that is also disadvantage of tubular membrane.(Refer Slide Time: 44:59)
So, the next one is hollow fibre any we are having here so this is the tubular membrane. This
is your tubes of 5 to 15 mm so here your feed is in. So, your permeate gets across the
membrane and retentate will be retained and taken out, and the permeate comes out of the
membrane and it gets collected in the tube module.
(Refer Slide Time: 45:27)
So, the next one is hallow fibre membranes a large number of small diameters fibres sealed at
the ends with epoxy resin, polyurethanes as well as the silicon rubber. The membranes are
asymmetric in nature, and feed side having lower pore size, and are self supporting. So, they
have a very high specific area per unit volume. So, what are all the disadvantage of tubularmembranes  so  that  are  taken  care  in  the  hallow  fibre  membrane  and  per  unit  volume
compared with the tubular membrane. 
So, it is about 30,000 meter square per cube. And, cleaned solution, and thus are most used in
gas separation or pervaporation. So you can use this hollow fibre membrane when your
solution is cleaned so in that case so most of the time it is used in the gas separation or
pervaporation process. And hollow fibre membranes have low fibre diameter so that chances
plugging are very high as compare to tubular membrane.
(Refer Slide Time: 46:28)
So, this is your hollow fibre membrane so this is hollow fibres start together in the tube and
this  is  the  flow  direction,  this  is  the  tangential  flow  direction.  So,  permeate  is  getting
collected here and the retentate will be inside the membrane. So, this is the cross sectional
view  of hollow fibre membrane.  So, this is the permeate gets collected. So, this  is the
concentrate  gets  collected  in here. So, this  is  the  single  hollow  fibre  so feed is  in the
tangential flow. So, your permeate gets in to the fibre that is getting collected and this is
nothing but a tube sheet and concentrated will be taken out. (Refer Slide Time: 47:20)
So, then next one is plate and frame module so here also low specific area which is also
unattractive. In this module two membranes are sandwiched with the feed sides facing each
other. So, that means so I have a membrane, so this is the feed side of this membrane, this is
the feed side of this membrane. So, feed side facing each other it is tact, so that means the
feed is going in between two. So, the permeate goes out of the membrane and retentate gets
collected. 
So, then you will have here the feed side then this is another membrane. So, this is the feed
side facing each other so that means your feed retanted feed retantate this is an alternative
module. The spacer is placed between the feed and permeates side and to achieve that desired
membrane area, a number of such sets are placed in parallel. So, this is equivalent to your
plate and frame plus which is used for filtration. 
So this is based on the desired membrane area this kind of modules can be connected together
to acheview particular decide membrane area. The membrane replacement and cleaning is
easier because it comes with the separate modules so you can assembled disassembled them
based on your requirement also cleaning is easy. It can be disassembled very easily and no
need for costly pretreatment of the feed that is also advantage.(Refer Slide Time: 48.58)
And spiral wound module is adaption of plate and frame module, so where membrane sets are
wrapped around the central line. So, instead of keeping to membranes feed side facing each
other, here we wrapped the membrane in the central line. So, compact structure with high
pressure durability. And, also it has the highest specific area among all the modules but, feed
needs to be free of particles that is disadvantage. 
(Refer Slide Time: 49:30)
So, we are going to see here so this is your plate and frame modules, so if you see these are
all membranes. So the feed is entered here so you will collect the retantate here and the
permeate is getting collected from the membrane module here. So the feed as well as theretantate goes in the alternative compartment. So this is nothing but a spiral wound, so spiral
wound your membrane is wrapped in the central line. 
So, what happens is the feed is employed here. So, this permeates through the membrane so
your permeate is getting collected inside the tube. And your retantate will be in this side. This
is nothing but a spiral wound membrane module.
(Refer Slide time: 50:18)
And, types of membrane processes so as we discuss few slides before. The membrane is
selective barrier and this selectivity is important for separation. So, that means whether my
membrane allows the solvent or solute or among the particular solute. Alright so based on this
selectivity so we divide the processes and the various selectivity parameters used to influence
the product concentration and removal of solute from the solvent. So, one is diffusivity size
and shape of the particle. 
Because, when we are discussing about the different modules, we also told certain modules
are  not  suitable  for  solution  containing  particles.  Certain  modules  needs  only  the  clear
solution. So, size and shape of particles is also important and electrostatic charge for example
if u you are using electro dialysis. So, this is important parameter to be considered and
physicochemical interactions between the membrane as well as the feed one of the module.
We also told the membranes are inert membranes carbon or zirconia carbon. So, and the
violability will be taken care, when we use the pervaporation process and the solubility. So
these are all the selectivity parameters.(Refer Slide Time: 51:52)
And membrane materials polysulfone, polyether sulfone and cellulose acetate polyamides
and polyacrylonitrile. So, these are all polymeric membranes organic polymeric membranes.
So,  we  also  have  the  organic  membranes  which  are  nothing  but  a  borosilicate  glass,
pyrolyzed carbon, zirconia carbon. So these are also widely used.
(Refer Slide Time: 52:22)
And  the  driving  forces  for  membrane  processes  concentration  gradient,  transmembrane
pressure, chemical potential,  osmatic pressure, electric  field, osmatic pressure in reverse
osmosis, then transmembrane pressure and concentration gradient, magnetic field, partial
pressure, so all of them are driving force based on the  particular  membrane  separation
process. So the major categories are ultrafiltration, microfiltration, and reverse osmosis. So,these  are  all  classified  as  on  the  basis  of  molecular  size  of  the  pore  as  well  as  the
transmembrane pressure. 
So, here major parameter or critical parameter based on which the classification is done is the
molecular  size  of the pores  as  well  as  the  transmembrane  pressure.  But, if we see the
pervaporation technic which is based on this separation driven by the partial pressure. So, we
have told here the partial pressure and the selectivity that depends upon the solubility and
diffusivity of species in the membrane, solubility as well as diffusivity of the species in the
membrane. 
So, here I will stop this lecture. So tomorrow we will see about the various membrane
separation process. So, in the todays lecture we discussed about what is called separation
process, where it exactly used in the food industry. And, what are all the basic separation
process and what are all the advance separation process. Advance separation process the
major ones are chromatographic and electric field assisted separation process as well as
membrane separation. 
Chromatographic separation we just discussed very briefly because we are not going to
concentrate much on that. And membrane separation process as well as the electric field
assisted separation process. We are going to discuss in next two lectures. So, membranes
separation process ultra, micro and Nano filtration as well as reverse osmosis. And electric
field assisted membrane separation process, we will discuss about the electro dialysis. And, if
possible we will try to do few basic problems. 
(Refer Slide Time: 54:38)
And these are all the resources and additional references, what i have used in this lecture
thank you.