Thermal Processing of Food
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Department of Chemical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
Lecture 21
Various Types of Heat Exchanger for Food Process Engineering
Good morning all. So, today we are going to discuss about various types of heat exchangers
which are used in the food process engineering or food process industries. So we go a little
introduction about the heat exchangers and what how to design a heat exchanger? And what
are all the applications of heat exchangers in food process industries? And main type of for
heat exchangers we are going to see in this particular lecture.
(Refer slide Time: 1:01)
So the heat exchangers are devices for the exchange of heat between two fluids separated by
a heat conducting partition. So this is nothing but a wall, right? Two fluids we have a hot
fluid as well as cold fluid. So mostly cold fluid is here is you are a liquid flow food particle,
sometimes  with the particulate solids. Heat exchangers are extensively used in the food
industry for heating, which is nothing but pasturizers, and cooling chilled water generators
and heat induced phase change, so which is nothing but a freezing and evaporation. 
So this evaporation we have seen in the membrane separation as well to concentrate the food
material, right? So then each one of the fluids may be confined or unconfined stagnant or
flowing. So, depends upon the heat exchanger we use, so each one of the two fluids may beconfined or unconfined, stagnant or flowing. The partition is a heat conducting solid wall
usually made of metal to give high thermal conductivity. 
The design of a heat exchanger usually involves two main domains namely thermal analysis
and hydraulic calculations because the heat exchanger, the food is liquid food right? So, if
you  remember  in  our  aseptic  processing  calculations  I  told  the  same  thing  because  in
continuous thermal processing. So, we need to take care of the hydraulic calculations as well
as the thermal analysis heat transfer as well as fluid flow. 
(Refer slide Time: 2:37)
So, here is one example so this is a solid wall these two are solid walls right the heat is given
here in the solid wall. So, the temperature here TA in the outside of the wall and TB in the
other side of the wall, and the wall temperature is T1 and this side it is T2 and the h1 is
nothing but a heat transfer coefficient h2 is a heat transfer coefficient in the other side, right?
So, this is the ambient maybe we can consider, so this is also ambient or you can consider
here maybe another fluid there, right? 
So, now if we want to write q the heat balance q is nothing but A, TA minus TB, so flux
which is nothing but a Q upon A, Q upon A is nothing but heat transfer rate upon area. So
heat transfer rate is nothing but in watts and area is in meter square, so this watt is nothing but
joules per second. So, that means heat transfer rate per meter square which is nothing but a
heat flux. Heat flux can be written as a thermal gradient because in heat transfer it is a
thermal gradient, any flux can be written as a gradient upon resistance okay? So, in heat transfer it is a thermal gradient, the R we are going to write, so R if you see, so
this is the h1, h1 is nothing but heat transfer coefficient, convective heat transfer coefficient,
and this is nothing but a solid-solid material.  For example, this is the wall of the heat
exchanger, so this is the wall of the heat exchanger, this side one fluid resides, the other side
of the wall another fluid reside, so instead of ambient you can take an example of heat
exchanger itself.
So, this is the heat exchanger wall, so one fluid resides this side, another fluid resides that
side. So, the h1 is the heat transfer coefficient of this particular fluid A and h2 is the heat
transfer coefficient of fluid B and the temperature T1 is at the wall, near the fluid A side, T2
is the temperature in the wall near the fluid B side, right? So, TB is a temperature of the fluid
B and TA is the temperature of fluid A. So, I have basically three resistance, one on the fluid
A side another on the wall and another on the fluid B side, right?
So, I can combine them one upon h1, because there h is nothing but a heat transfer coefficient
resistance is one upon conductance, so then your conductive resistance is nothing but X upon
K, X is nothing but a thickness of the wall, okay? So, that I am taking as a X, so X upon K
plus 1 upon h2, right, so this is the resistance, right. So, here the T is in Kelvin, right, so the 1
upon h is watt per meter square Kelvin, so your X is meter, K is watt per meter Kelvin. So,
this is 1 upon watt per meter square Kelvin, so which is nothing but K upon 1 upon if the
meter comes here it is 1 upon meter.
So, this also 1 upon watt per meter square, 1 upon watt per meter square Kelvin, so this goes
above so which is nothing but K K get cancelled so this also will become watt per meter
square watt per meter square unit is cancelled. So, I can write my Q as A TB minus T, TA
minus TB, divided by one upon U so this one upon U is nothing but 1 upon h1 plus X upon
K. So this is a conductive resistance this is convective resistance plus 1 upon h2 this is also
convective resistance. 
So if you write q is equal to UA, TA minus TB is nothing but del T, so U is nothing but
overall heat transfer coefficient AC area, del T is nothing but temperature difference between
the fluids TA TB and Q is nothing but heat transfer rate. So, if you remember we have done in
the pasteurization plate a type heat exchanger problem, we have also calculated number of
plates required for the heating. So, if you remember we have taken the U, the milk side heat transfer coefficient in heating
cooling as well as the regeneration there we have taken around approximately thousand watt
per meter squared Kelvin. So, if your fluid A is liquid and fluid B is liquid in the plate heat
exchanger type you are used around thousand to three thousand watt per meter squared
Kelvin. 
So, that is what it is given, so based on the fluid, for example, if it is a gas gas in tubular heat
exchanger, so your heat transfer coefficient 5 to 50 watt per meter squared Kelvin. So, if you
remember the same pasteurization lecture, I also told in the pasturizer or sterilizer, you should
not keep the air packets because air is a very low conductive medium. So, you can see from
here the liquid if you have a fluid A as a liquid, fluid B as a liquid you are overall heat
transfer coefficient is thousand around thousand watt per meter square. 
So, if you have a gaseous heat exchanger so your overall coefficient is 5 to50 watt per meter
squared Kelvin. So, if you have air packets inside the sterilizer or the pasteurizing unit, so
that will lead to high temperature difference between the food material, so that leads to
contamination. So this is the reason we need to avoid air in sterilizing operation, okay? 
(Refer slide Time: 9:01)
So, in introduction in continuous heat exchangers both the fluids are in movement, right? So
mostly the heat exchanger we use for continuous flow. In continuous a heat exchanger both
fluids are in moment. There are three main types of flow patterns, one is parallel counter
current and cross flow. So, one example would be this one, so this is a counter current,counter current, your hot fluid is coming in and going this side and your cold fluid is coming
here so and leaving this side of the heat exchanger.
So, this is the counter current. Co-current means your fluid, hot fluid as well as cold fluid hot
fluid hot out hot in, so you are cold in and cold out, right? Cross flow is nothing but so you
are hot fluid and hot fluid out. So, this is inside the tube, through your cold fluid will be
perpendicular to a hard fluid direction. So, this is nothing but your cross flow, okay? So this
is counter current flow, this is co-current flow. Parallel and counter flow are most common in
liquid liquid as well as liquid to condensing vapour heat exchange. 
So, this condensing vapour is nothing but you use the phase change heat to heat the liquid.
For example, if you take heating the food material most of the time we have seen heating
medium as a steam, right? So this is cold in cold the fluid in and a cold fluid out, so if you see
in the latent heat exchange. So, there will not be any temperature difference so this is a steam
temperature hot in and hot out, so there will not be any temperature difference in the steam. 
So, it is a parallel as well as counter current flow or most common and liquid liquid or liquid
to condensing vapour heat exchange, right? And cross flow exchange is particularly common
for heating or cooling the air, so that is gas gas heat exchanger we have seen, right? So, there
cross flow is mainly used. As a result of flow the temperature of each fluid and therefore, the
temperature drop for heat transfer may change from one point to other point in the exchanger.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:56)
So, this is where the concept of log means temperature difference has come so LMTD. So if
you remember in all the calculations we have used q is equal to UA Del Tm, all right? So this
is nothing but log mean temperature difference, so what does it mean? So, it means so I am
putting this as a wall. So, here is your hot fluid in, so here is your hot fluid out, so cold fluid
in, I am taking co-current flow and a cold flow it out, okay? 
So, if you make it in terms of X versus, distance versus temperature so that Thi Thout. So this
is in, so the this is TC in and TC out, okay? So, if I take a particular area, so this would give
me Th in and Th out so the same way for this particular area, TC in and TC out okay? So this
Th in minus TC in we call it as a del Ti, so this we call it as a del Tem okay?
So, then finally the derivation of LMTD I am not going to do because that is not in the
syllabus of this particular course. But I would like to tell you that if you really wanted to
know in depth of why we need to calculate logarithmic mean temperature difference, how to
derive that, you may refer some of the books given in the reference okay. So, the final the del
Tm, how do we write this which is nothing but del Ti minus del te. 
So, this is Inlet, this is exit. I divided by lon of del Ti divided by Del Te. So, why we are
taking mean temperature difference? Because the throughout that distance my delta T is
varying. So, I cannot take one particular delta T. So, if you see here so this is the delta T here,
so it is there delta T here, okay. So, it is varying along the length of the heat exchanger that is
the way we take mean temperature difference, logarithmic mean temperature difference.
And also remember here I have taken U is constant along the length because though my
temperature is varying, my overall heat transfer coefficient is constant. So, from this I will
calculate the log mean temperature difference, then substitute in the q formula which is
nothing but UA del T. Here you can substitute your U and Q you will be able to know, Q is
nothing but for hot fluid, mass flow rate of hot fluid, CP of hot fluid and del T del T in the
sense Th in minus Th out okay.
So, if you write for cold fluid it is a mass flow rate of cold fluid CP of cold fluid, this is TC in
minus TC out, okay. So, remember one hot fluid loses heat losses heat and cold fluid gains
the heat. So, this is the way we calculate and design the heat exchanger right. So, if I want to
know how much heat transfer area is needed to heat my fluid the food or liquid food. So, I
will get to know from Q by U del Tm.So the Delta if I know Inlet outlet temperature if I know flow configuration whether it is a
counter flow or cross flow or co-current flow, then I will be able to calculate my del Ti, del Te
and from there I will calculate the log mean temperature and from the log mean temperature.
I will be able to calculate the area provided U is given, and q I will be able to calculate from
mass rate of the hot fluid, this is mass rate which is nothing but in kg per second or hour so
this is kilo joules per kg Kelvin so this is in Kelvin.
So, this Kelvin Kelvin gets cancelled, kilo joules per hour, so you if you convert into joules
kilo joules per second so that is nothing but kilo, so what I told you is here, this is also in
watts, right? So, unit, you can calculate the Q and substitute in the formula so that is the way
you design the heat transfer area for liquid to food to be heated in the heat exchanger.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:20)
So, then intro about the heat exchanger, why we need to study? An improvement in quality is
one of the main driving forces behind the development of continuous heat processes. So the
liquid, semi-liquid products such as milk juices and sauces suffered from over processing in
traditional  low-temperature  long  time  of  an  in  container  or  batch  processing.  Batch
processing in one of the lectures also we have discussed an enormously so I just to put it and
forget it. For example, if you see the temperature for the pasteurization 63 degree centigrade
about 30 minutes. 
So, this causes the lower processing, so due to which the continuous process came into
existence. So caramelized two flavours poor colour retention and a lack of a reproducibleproduct where all the problems associated with the products processed by batch method. So,
to  overcome  these  disadvantages  then  to  keep  product  safety  in  mind  the  continuous
processing approaches were developed. 
(Refer Slide Time 19:27)
The achievement of safe products by a thermal processing is based upon the theory behind
the destruction of microorganisms. So why we are thermal processing it the, for the reason
for destruction of microorganisms. The products must be heated to a set temperature for a set
time in order to achieve a commercially sterile product, in continuous heat processing also
called continuous flow processing, the product is thermally processed before being placed
into an appropriate container on a continuous basis through a heat exchanging plant. 
So, the main part of the continuous thermal processing is nothing but a heat exchanger, okay.
So, the heat exchanger apparatus will be used to for both heating as well as cooling, cooling
phase of the process, this we discussed in our earlier lectures itself, so heating as well as
cooling  and  if  you  see  in  the  aseptic  process,  regeneration  also  in  between  heating
regeneration and cooling. (Refer Slide Time 20:39)
In continuous system the foods under consideration are liquid or Semi-liquid products which
may be pumped through a system heated and cooled while continuously flowing down the
process line a wide range of products are processed by this method that means the continuous
flow process, either the main process to achieve a safe product. 
The main process itself a heat exchanging process which is nothing but ultra-heat treated or
ultra-high temperature are a step with enough further processing the heat exchanger may be
used as an intermediate step to heat. The fluid or the main process itself a heat exchanging
process which is happening in the ultra-high temperature or even aseptic processing. 
The  three  main  types  of process  are suitable  for continuous  flow  processing or aseptic
systems, which is high and low acid foot and hot fill systems, pasteurization process so
everything comes under this continuous flow process category. Aseptically packed products
or process two temperatures that will render the product commercially sterile, so aseptic
processing we have already seen in maybe three lectures I guess.(Refer Slide Time 21:54) 
So then heating applications so this also we have discussed if it is a high acid products such
as juice can be processed at pasteurization temperature to destroy the microorganism that can
cost the spoilage of the product. There are then rapidly cool to reduce the loss of volatiles
within the product also to reduce the contamination of thermophilic bacterias, right, because
when you slowly cooling there may be a chance for the recontamination. So the cooling is
done very rapidly and filled into a presterilized pack under sterile conditions. 
So hot acid products we do pasteurization and a packet under sterile conditions in a sterilized
packaging the low acid products which undergo same principle. However, the temperature
employed is much higher to and should no survival of the pathogenic bacteria. So that is why
we go for a sterilization the temperature applied here at 125 to 145 degree so allowing for
much shorter holding times and promoting a higher quality product. The continuous flow
processing system can also be used in a hot fill processes for high acid products again hot fill
processes for high acid products that would otherwise lose product quality through slow
cooling methods. (Refer Slide Time: 23:14) 
And high acid choices again high acid food comes under pasteurization category. They are
filling directly into suitable containers using the heat of the product to decontaminate the
packaging. So sometimes this also tried so this method is this method allows a much quicker
throughput than a typical batch process would offer the high acid certain high acid foots
pasteurized and filled in the normal containers not in a sterile containers. 
So the product heat itself further decontaminate the packaging so this also another heating
applications.  Where  heat  exchanging  systems  are  used  and  pasteurization  of  low  acid
products that will then be cooled and held under chill the conditions so this is where we do
not so we need to refrigerate them, even low acid products, so pasteurized milk juices soups
everything comes under this category. 
(Refer Slide Time 23:17) 
This processing step extends the shelf life and ensures the safe product the product must be
chilled to maintain its safety and quality throughout the shelf life shelve lives up to ten days
can be achieved for some products. So these are all some of the heating up applications
furnace high acid products which are pasteurized and part-owner sterilized to packaging
under sterile condition low acid products which are to be sterilized to kill the pathogenic
bacteria and hot fill processes. Where high acid products are processed and these high acid
products are processed and filled in the packaging.So  that  temperature  of the  products  itself  will  take  care  of the  decontamination  of  the
packaging system then further pasteurization of low acid products. Here we did sterilization
so if you do pasteurization that has to be chilled to extend the further shelf life, okay. So,
although heating vessels are cooking kettles by definition heat exchanges, so whatever we use
in day-to-day life those also called as a heat changer. Because the heat exchanger is one
which  exchanges  the  heat  right  through  a  solid  one  they  themselves  cooking  kettles
themselves as a heat exchanger.  
Even one of the lectures I mentioned whatever we do in normal day-to-day process which is
nothing but a pasteurization of milk. So, whenever we are heating the milk we are doing
pasteurization but that is not the case with the industry they have to handle the large volume
and  they  have  supposed  to  store  and  distribute  for  further  use.  So  in  that  case  GMP
regulations were to be followed right good manufacturing practices to be followed. 
Here also the heat exchangers, cooking kettles also by definition heat exchangers but the only
continuous inflow heat exchangers which are used in the food processing industry which we
will be discussed in this lecture. Because of strict sanitary requirements, right, so only a few
of the many heat exchanger types utilized in the process industry are suitable for food
applications. 
So the same thing I will be telling in the dryers as well so we are also going to have a lectures
on dryers various dryers used in the food processing industry there. There are lot of dryers are
there and even normal chemical industry also uses various dryersm but these dryers which are
used in food industry should be hygienic, right. 
The dehydration plant should be contamination free for the dryers to be used in the food
industry the same thing here. Even though there are lot many varieties of heat exchangers are
available  in  the  processing  industries.  But  food  processing  industry  strictly  follows  the
sanitary requirements so because of which very few types of heat exchangers are used. (Refer Slide Time: 27:06)
The first one is tubular heat exchanger the simplest representative of this group consists of a
pair of concentrating tubes for ease of cleaning the food product usually flows in the inner
tube and the heating or cooling medium in the outer annular space. The variation of this type
is the triple tube right, so which has three tubes as a concentric tube, in the middle tube your
product would be flowing the other two inner and outer tube your heating and cooling
medium. 
If it is a heating process it is a heating medium, if it is a cooling process it is a cooling
medium the product is fed into the middle tube and the heating or cooling medium to the
inner and outer tube which provides the heat transfer areas on both side of the middle tube.
So, if you have a tube in concentric double pipe heat exchanger, so you will have the hot fluid
flowing in here, so if you have one more tube. 
So probably we will see in the here, what is tube in tube, as well as tube in tube in tube heat
exchanger. First, we will see the theory. So, the product is fed to the middle tube and that
heating and cooling medium to the inner and outer tube thus providing heat transfer areas on
both side of the middle tube. The calculation of overall heat transfer coefficient for this type
of equipment is more complex.
So, whatever I told here so here fluid is flowing other side of the wall one heat exchanger
wall is there one fluid is flowing this side another fluid is flowing this side. So that is the way
we calculated the overall heat transfer coefficient but if you have a three tubes. Then youneed to further calculate the heat transfer coefficient that is not that easy or straightforward
method to calculate the overall heat transfer coefficient for the triple tube heat exchanger than
the double tube heat exchanger. 
(Refer Slide Time 28:59)
So the next one is shell and tube the tubular heat exchanger consists of a bundles of parallel
tubes inside a larger cylindrical jacket. Again the product is fed into the tube side, so in a type
of tubular exchanger known as a Joule effect heater. The tube wall is electrically heated, so it
is not to be necessarily the cold fluid will be heated through the hot fluid, so here in the
certain type of tubular exchanger which is called as a Joule effect heater. 
The tube wall is founded with the electrical coils, they can be heated electrically as well the
tubular heat exchangers are particularly so trouble for heating or cooling highly viscous
products. Where relatively high pressures must be applied or therefore, heat realized foreign
bulk inflow sterilization of the products containing solid particles and for the heat treatment
of cooling of tomato paste prior to aseptic processing. 
So, these are used to for bulk inflow sterilization of the products which has certain solid
particles  as  well  or  for  the  heat  treatment  of  cooling  of  tomato  paste  prior  to  aseptic
processing. So that means high viscous, high viscous liquid food or so they can also be used
with the liquid food with the solid particles, food with solid particles. So, the tubular heat
exchangers are also the heat transfer component in tubular evaporators. (Refer Slide Time 30:47)
So, here is what your double pipe heat exchanger so which is nothing but a tubular heat
exchanger. So your hot fluid goes in here or you can say your liquid food material is inside
the tube liquid food. So, your heat medium or heating medium in terms of heating or cooling
medium in terms of cooling flows this side, heating or cooling medium, okay. 
So, this is the shell and tube, shall and tube, this is the shell and tube heat exchanger where
number of tubes. So, if you see number of tubes are put together in a bundle, so then the shell
side your normal heating or cooling medium will be flowing. So this is heating or cooling
medium, heating or cooling medium, so this is heating or cooling medium, so inside the tube
your food material is flowing. 
So, this is where in the industry where tubular heat exchanger looks like, right. And one more
thing what we have seen the triple pipe is, right. So triple pipe is something like this, right?
So we told so the inner pipe as well as the outer pipe, right? So in the both places your
heating or cooling medium is flowing in the middle of the pipe, in the middle pipe so your
liquid food is flowing. 
So, this is tube in tube in tube heat exchanger. So, this is shell-and-tube, this is tubular
exchanger, which has two concentric tubes. So, this is scraped surface so we will see about
the theory and come back. So, this is a clear, right, like shell and tube as well as tubular
exchanger. This is the basic types, so in the tube your liquid food material is going, so other
tubes you are, or tube or shell side you are heating or cooling medium is flowing. So, it is not necessary I need to heat or cold my liquid food with the hot fluid or cold fluid.
So, there may be electrically wounded tubular exchanger also there, so in that case it is called
as Joule effect heater. And these shell and tube heat exchangers are used or tubular heat
exchangers are used to for liquid food which contain solid particles as well as the high
viscous liquid food also can be handled in the tubular heat exchangers. 
(Refer Slide Time: 34:06)
So, the scrap the surface heat exchangers, so which has a, they consist of a jacketed cylinder
equipped with the central dasher with scrapping blades, so that is right here. Here, so this is
your jacket so in the middle you have a rotor right so the rotor has blades. So this is the sideview, so this is blades, so this is a rotor, so at this place your liquid food with the high amount
of solid particles stays there okay. 
So  they  consist  of  a  jacketed  cylinder  equipped  with  the  central  rotating  dasher  with
scrapping blades. So they can be horizontal or vertical the product is fed into the cylinder
they rapidly rotating the rotating speed is about 600 to 700 rpm and they spread scraps and
moves the product as a film over the wall the heating or cooling medium is fed into the
jacket. So here you have your heating or cooling medium. 
So, these rotors helping the products because it has high amount of solids  because the
scrapped surface heat exchanger is mainly used to for high viscous fluids or liquid food
contains  a large amount of solid particulates. So, for this application only the scrapped
surface heat exchangers are used so in that case. So, these blades are helping the solids liquid
food with the high amount of solids to form a film layer near the jacketed one in the other
side of the jacketed one you are heating or cooling medium is flowing. 
So, the scrap surface heat exchangers are used to for heating cooling highly viscous fluids
and for slush freezing the continuous ice cream freezes  and slush freezes  or essentially
scrapped surface heat exchanges with the refrigerant evaporating in the jacket. So one thing is
as I said earlier, it need not be always hard fluid or cold fluid here the refrigerant is also used
as a heating or cooling medium because it gets evaporated the less temperature okay. 
So the scrapped exchanger is an expensive piece of equipment both in price as well as in
operating cost because it has got many moving parts. So the exchanges are expensive. (Refer Slide Time 36:45)
So the next one is very important heat exchangers in the food industry so it is almost came
into existence in 1923. And in most of the pasteurizing or a aseptic processing the plate type
heat exchangers are used. So the plate type heat exchangers are well established method for
processing homogeneous products of low viscosity making them ideal for use within dairies,
mostly in the pasteurization or aseptic processing of milk. The plate heat exchangers consist
of a series of plates connected on a frame. The product and heating or cooling media flow in
alternate channels in thin layers to provide good heat transfer conditions.
So, I have a plates one side my hot fluid is flowing other side cold fluid, other side hot fluid
other side cold fluid. So this is the way the alternative channels are arranged. The plates are
sealed by elastic sealing gasket cemented into a perforated groove, right? So generally the
plates are of polished stainless steel which is of about 0.5 to 1.25 mm in thickness separated
by 3 to 6 mm right.
So, these plates are of stainless steel, the thickness of them is 0.5 to 1.25 mm they are
separated by the distance 3 to 6 mm, okay. So, these plates are separated by 3 to 6 mm and
they are sealed by elastic sealing gasket cemented into a perforated groove, so this we will
see in picture. So, the surface of the plates is usually corrugated in order to increase the area
available for heat transfer as well as enhance the turbulence present in the system resulting in
a high thermal efficiency. So, these are corrugated to promote mainly the turbulence and also
sometimes it also gives the strength to the plates which are stacked together okay. (Refer Slide Time 39:01)
So, the thermal regeneration can in the plate type exchanges as we have seen in many of our
lectures. The thermal regeneration is possible which can lower the energy cost substantially,
then narrow gaps mean that the units are best suited for low viscosity homogeneous products
because the gaps between the plates are very-very narrow. 
So, we cannot handle the liquid food with the large amount of particulate solids because it
gets in between the plates and further fouling can occur. So attempts to process particulate
products, which is example is nothing but the fruit juices with the pulp, right. That cell may
result in blocked channels and eventually blown plates due to the pressure imbalance between
the product and the media sides of the plates. 
So, for this reason only products with less than 10 percentage particulate content or normally
recommended, when processing with plate type heat exchanger, so this has to be kept in
mind, so we cannot process the liquid foot with more than 10 percentage of the particulate
content. And the regeneration is possible in plate type heat exchangers which lowers the
energy cost. 
And there are many variations of the plate type heat exchanger. So, how to take care of each
and every plate? And which type of groove should be there and based on the product we can
select them, so which way we want the plate type heat exchanger to be designed. (Refer Slide Time 40:35)
So, here we see, so this is the plate type heat exchangers looks like. So this is your upper bar
so, this is your head plate, head plate in the sense header and this is the follower, right? So in
between the header and follower your plates were arranged. So, as I said so here your hot
fluid is flowing and here your hot fluid is flowing, here your hot fluid is flowing, so there is a
mechanism which transfers this hard fluid to here and so here your cold fluid is flowing,
right. 
So that means so this flows through the plate, okay, so this is the lower bar this is upper bar.
So, in which there are two mechanism one is the plates you can remove via bars or it can be
hanged in the bar, so if it is hanged in the bar it can be easily taken out because one of the
advantage for this plate type heat exchanger is this is a module type, right, so in future if I
want to increase the protection, so I can just add one more module in the plate type heat
exchanger. 
So, in that way the module can be easily added or removed based on the need of the process
industry, so that  is  the  way we have seen number  of plates  requirement,  right?  So for
regeneration section how many number of plates or heating section how many number of
plates, or cooling section how many number of plates, so we have estimated as a number of
plates in the each section. 
So, in that way the plates can be hanged or the plates can be welded in the bar so that it can
be removed in the later stage, but hanging would give me advantage if I want to remove oradd the plates. And so this is the plate package and this bolts so this will come here, so to
stack the plates, right? To keep them intact between the header and follower, so these are
various categories of plate configuration.
(Refer Slide Time 42:30)
So, this configuration is washboard, so this is zigzag and this is chevron or herringbone, the
(c) type, the (d) type is protrusions and depressions and (e) type is washboard with secondary
corrugations and (f) is oblique washboard. There are different varieties, right. So, that is what
I told, so when the fluid is passing through, so it is designed in such a way to increase the
heat transfer and to give further turbulence to the, turbulence to the fluid, okay. So, that is the
way it increases the heat transfer. (Refer Slide Time 43:21)
And if you compare your shell-and-tube module and plate module this is the way it looks like
so in that way it is very compact compared to shell and tube heat exchanger. 
(Refer Slide Time 43:33)
So, the advantage wise the capacity can be increased or decreased by adding or removing
plates, this I already discussed, so that flexibility I have in the plate type heat exchanger, the
sanitation by opening the stack both sides of the entire exchange area are made accessible for
cleaning and inspection. So, it is just the plate, in the plate the fluid is flowing, so I can
remove the plate very easily and clean them and inspect them when needed right. So, the sanitation wise it is very much advantageous and high heat transfer coefficient, due to
increased turbulence in the narrow flow channel. That is the way the corrugations were made
and a compact heat exchange surface to volume ratio is very high. So, that is the way it is
compact. On the other hand, disadvantage sight, it is a narrow size of the flow channels
results in high pressure drop and limits is used to only low viscosity fluids, which does not
contain large suspended particulates. This is the disadvantage and also their need for gaskets. 
(Refer Slide Time 44:43)
Gaskets in the sense, so here if you see in this, so this is nothing but an gaskets okay. So,
which prevents the further leaking of the fluid, right? So the need for gaskets is very much
disadvantageous one. As I discussed there are many improvements made in these kind of heat
exchanges. For example, there is something called double plate security system. So that
means the both the plates where welded and formed as a channel then after that these formed
channels were further made together in the module by gaskets, right. 
So, if there is any leakage between the plates then obviously it is known, because it is kept as
a channel, so in that way the security system can be improved to avoid the leakage of the
liquid foot product when it is heated. So, there are many improvements and also I said earlier
so all to be performed in the contamination free area. So, that one has to ensure while using
any of the heat exchange equipment in the food processing industry. (Refer Slide Time 45:53)
So, that is all for heat exchanges. So, these are the references and additional resources what I
have used in this particular lecture. Thank you.