Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
Lecture No. 29
Sanitary Components and Requirements
Good morning everyone, so today we are going to discuss about sanitary components and its
requirements. So, till we are almost end of the course and till now what we have discussed is
thermal  processing,  various  thermal  processing,  also  we  have  discussed  about  specialized
equipments, dryers and heat exchangers. 
And also we discussed about special processing techniques for the food which are nothing but
membrane separation processes and extrusion processes and last few classes we have also seen
about the food biosensors and nutraceuticals food components etcetera. So, this particular week
we  are  going  to  discuss  about  the  sanitary  components  and  its  requirements  and  also  the
regulatory considerations.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:31)
So, the introduction goes like this, the standards and design criteria for equipment. So, for safe
food and adequate sanitation programmes, the equipment whatever we use it for processing and
handling  food  products,  so  they  should  be  designed,  fabricated,  constructed  and  installed
according to the sanitary design principle. So, especially in food industry this is very muchimportant, so in almost every lecture I also insist upon the good manufacturing practices. So,
beyond that what else standards are available, that is what we are going to see.
And these food processing equipments or food handling equipments also should be adequately
cleaned and sanitized. The food contacting surfaces, so they should be of resistant to daily
exposure of corrosive food products and cleaning and sanitizing chemical. So, they should be
resistant over corrosive food products and also the cleaning and sanitizing chemicals. 
And so who inspect this? So, the federal, state and local regulatory agencies regularly inspect
these  food  processing  and  food  handling  equipments.  And  there  is  a  US  department  of
agriculture, it is called as USDA and Food Safety and Inspection Services, so that is FSIS, so
they pre-approves the equipment for use in meat, poultry and egg product facilities. 
And the same USDA along with Agricultural Marketing Service which is nothing but AMS and
their Dairy Division, so they inspect the process equipment used in the manufacturing of dairy
facilities under their inspection. So, here it is very much important for the food processing
equipments and food handling surfaces should be designed, fabricated, constructed and installed
according to the sanitary design principles and also they should be adequately cleaned and
sanitized and these surfaces should be of resistant to daily exposure to corrosive food products
and as well as the cleaning and sanitizing chemicals.
And the inspection is regularly done by the federal, state and local regulatory agencies and the
US department of agriculture and food safety inspection service, personnel are involved in pre-
approving the equipment which are used in meat, poultry and egg product facilities. And the
same USDA along with the Agricultural Marketing Services, so there is a dairy division under
Agricultural  Marketing  Service,  that  dairy  division  along  with  USDA  inspect  the  process
equipment used in the manufacturing of dairy facilities.(Refer Slide Time: 04:43)
So, what are all sanitation related organizations, so that is what we are going to see here. And
Food and Drug Administration, so this is every one of us know, so most of the food products,
food related issues and the consumption of food and any toxic levels, most of the time we refer
the FDA approval or we check for the FDA approval, so which is nothing but Food and Drug
Administration. 
So, inspectors who are belong to Food and Drug Administration, they follow the current good
manufacturing practices, which is called cGMPs. So, which talks about the fabrication and
cleanability  of  food  equipment,  developed  a  general  equipment  evaluation  program  for
equipment used in Grade A Dairy Facilities.
So, the FDA inspectors, follow this current good manufacturing practices which is nothing but
cGMP, so this is responsible for fabrication and cleanability of food equipment and also they
developed  a  general  equipment  evaluation  program  for  equipment  used  in  Grade  A  Dairy
Facilities. So, this we have discussed in our pasteurization lecture itself that Grade A milk
quality, so what are all the qualities and the equipment to be used and what are all the design
specifications used for those equipments which are used in Grade A Dairy Industry.
And variety of standard organizations are there and there are difference between these standards.
So, almost here itself we have, we are seeing almost 6 standardizations, so though we have
different standard organization and difference between their standards but the ultimate goal ofthis sanitation related organization is to take extreme care and sound sanitary principles should
be applied on the food equipment manufacturing. Like so in that line, there are 6 sanitation
related organizations today we are going to see, so the one is 3-A Sanitary Standards, Inc. and a
National Sanitation Foundation and Underwriters Laboratories and International Organization
for Standardization and American National Standards Institute and European Hygienic Design
Group. So, each one them we will see in detail.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:15)
So, the first one is 3A standards, the design symbol is this and this is in line with the US Public
Health Service, so the US Public Health Service offered cooperation with the 3A program. And
the first equipment bearing 3A symbol unveiled in 1954. And this 3A Sanitary Standards Inc.
formed in 2003, so this is formed as an independent non-profit corporation. So, until 2003, the
authorization to use 3A symbol was based on the self-certification. 
So, now it is a third party verification inspection program also included in 3A standards to
enhance the integrity of 3A program. And there are developments, still in the 3A standards to
modernize the consensus development process used to develop, revise and amend 3A Sanitary
Standards and 3A accepted practices. So, this goes regular developments and revise and certain
amendments in their standards and accepted practices. (Refer Slide Time: 08:31)
So, the 3A Sanitary Standards developed for variety of equipment used in the dairy industry and
some equipment used in egg processing industry. The founding organization of 3A represent
equipment manufacturers, dairy processes and regulatory officials. So, probably that is why the
3A, the founding organizations of 3A represents all 3 groups, equipment manufacturers and dairy
processes as well as the regulatory officials.
So, the 3A Standards are used as a reference under a Grade A Pasteurized Milk Ordinance, so
PMO  this  is  what  we  might  have  discussed  milk  pasteurization  lecture  itself.  So,  the  3A
Standards are used as a reference under the Grade A Pasteurized Milk Ordinance, Grade A PMO,
the official regulatory document for the National Conference on Interstate Milk Shipments,
NCIMS. 
So, in NCIMS this is used as a official regulatory document for dairy standards or especially
milk. Then ANSI accredited the Standards Developer Organization and there are 68 3A Sanitary
Standards  and there are 9 3A accepted  practices. There are 360 plus  companies  across 23
countries hold this authorization to display 3A symbol on various equipment.(Refer Slide Time: 10:07)
So, the next one is the National Sanitation Foundation which is NSF, so this is the symbol. And
this is also a non-profit organization founded in 1944, whose headquarter is in Ann Arbor,
Michigan. And the goals is to develop standards, certify products and manage risk and focus on
food, water, air quality, environment. Air quality as well as environmental issues. 
The National Sanitation Foundation developed standards for equipment used in food service and
retail foods. So this NSF, the National Sanitation Foundation, it is not exclusively for food
products, so they have developed standards and certify products and manage risk, not only in the
food, so along with food, water, air quality and environment is also there but what we wanted is
the standards for equipment used in the food service and retail foods.
The NSF develops standards for food processing equipment and in collaboration with 3A. 3A
standards what we have seen, the NSF collaborated  with 3A and came with the standards
development for meats and poultry equipment, so which is nothing but 3A/NSF 15159, which is
reviewed by an International Organization for Standardization working group. 
So, though we are discussing about each and every sanitation related organization individually,
so we also here seen one of the organization NSF, they already collaborated with 3A to come for
the equipment practices for meats and poultry equipment and also this is reviewed by another
sanitation  regulatory  organization  which  is  nothing  but  International  Organization  for
Standardization.(Refer Slide Time: 12:12)
The next one is European Hygienic Engineering and Design Group, so this is founded in 1989
which is a consortium of equipment manufacturers, food companies, research institutes  and
public health authorities to handle European Commission directives, to handle EC directives, so
which is nothing but 98 upon 37 EC and 93 upon 43 EEC. 
So, these are nothing but the directives which come from EHEDG. The European Hygienic
Design Group is the primary organization for food equipment approval in Europe, so in Europe
the food equipment or food processing or food handling equipment approval should be done by a
this EHEDG group.
And this EHEDG organization published series of guidelines for the construction and design of
food processing equipment rather than standards. So, they have not developed any standards but
they have developed series of guidelines and published for the construction and design of food
processing equipment. So, this is the symbol of EHEDG. (Refer Slide Time: 13:25)
And some of them have symbol or insignia use authorization programs that require third party
verification  of  compliance  with  the  appropriate  standard  or  guideline.  So,  some  of  these
guidelines proposed by or published by EHEDG organization, needs the third party verification
with the appropriate standard or guideline.
The acceptance for food processing equipment used in some European countries is based upon
the cleanability testing performed in EHEDG laboratories, the cleanability test will be performed
in their EHEDG laboratory itself and we have also seen here, so this is the group of equipmentmanufacturers, food companies, research institutes as well as the public health authorities, so
they also have their own labs to check the testing based on cleanability. 
And International trade associations, so example is International Dairy Federation, IDF and
International Standards Organization, so example is Codex Alimentarius and the ISO are also
generally  involved  in  equipment  hygiene  standards.  So,  not  only  EHEDG  group,  so  the
International trade associations, International Standards Organizations, so these also involved in
equipment hygiene standards.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:00)
So, the example of this EHEDG guideline, so whatever I have taken it from this particular
website of EHEDG. So, there are certain guidelines I am highlighting here, so you may would
like to check the other guidelines available in their websites itself. All these 6 sanitary related
organizations got their own website, so you may would like to check each of them and their
guidelines and standards in their website itself. So, I have taken a very picked ones, so the
number 2 talks about the method for assessing the in-place cleanability of food processing
equipment.
Number 5 a method for the assessment of in-line sterlizability of food processing equipment.
Hygienic design principle is given by number 8 and hygienic engineering of plants for the
processing of dry particulate materials, so that is given by 26. And materials of construction for
equipment in contact with food is given by number 32 and integration of hygienic and aseptic
systems is given by number 34. And hygienic welding of stainless steel tubing in the food
processing industry is given by number 35 and hygienic design and application of sensor is given
by number 37.
So, the EHEDG guidelines, the number is here and their title is there, so inside which it discusses
about in detail. So, that is anyway we are going to generally discuss about the food processing
equipment and their what are all the measures we need to take care in general but each one of
this sanitation related organization got their own standards and practices, so that you can refer on
their website itself.(Refer Slide Time: 17:01)
The next one is Underwriters Laboratories, the symbol is this UL and this is established in 1984
here with the headquarter in Northbrook, Illinois. It serves for 98 countries and especially UL’s
763 standard for motor operator commercial food preparing machines which includes coffee
grinders,  vegetable  cutters,  food  mixers,  non-refrigerated  ice  cube  dispensers,  etcetera.  So,
actually this UL Laboratory or Underwriters Laboratory, mostly developed the standards for
electrical related equipments. 
So, this we also use in food processing industry, so that is why I have mentioned here UL 763, so
these are nothing but standards for motor operator commercial food preparing machines and they
also cover risk of fire and electrical shock in the food industry. And UL 2007a which talks about
shatter containment of lamps for use in regulated food establishments. So, mostly this particular
sanitation  related  organization,  works  for  the  standards  and  practices  in  electrical  related
equipments. (Refer Slide Time: 18:26)
The next one and important one is the International Organization for Standards, ISO Standards,
so  most  of  the  time  we  also  heard  about  the  world’s  largest  developer  and  publisher  of
international standards. So, they founded in 1947, network of national standards institutes of 164
countries  and  1  member  per  country  is  involved  in  that,  with  headquarter  in  Geneva,
Switzerland. 
So, the representatives are from the government as well as from industry. The ISO Standards
make development, manufacturing and supply of products and services more efficient, safe and
clean processing and the ISO Standards also facilitate the trade between the countries and make
it fairer and easier. And it also provides the government with a technical base for health, safety,
environmental legislation and conformity assessment. 
And  they  also  share  technological  advances  and  good  management  practices  and  they
disseminate innovation and they safeguard the consumers and users of products and services and
make life simpler by providing solutions to common day to day problems. So, the ISO Standards
are very much popular one.(Refer Slide Time: 19:46)
The next one is ANSI, so American National Standard Institute, the symbol is this. So, again this
is also non-profit organization, founded in 1918 with the headquarters in Washington D.C. So,
they represents the interest of almost 1,00,000 plus companies and ANSI/ NSF, so as I said
earlier  so they both collaborated together, came  up with a standard practices. So, they are
numbered in various level but the 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,12,13,18,20,21,25,29,35,37,51,52 and 59, they
are related to food equipment sanitation. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:34)
So, we are going to see quickly the NSF/ANSI, standard 2 talks about the food equipment, 3
talks  about  commercial  warewashing  equipment,  the  4  talks  about  commercial  cooking,
rethermalization and powered hot food holding and transport equipment and the 5th number deals
with water heaters, hot water supply boilers and heat recovery equipment. And the 6th number
discusses about dispensing freezers and 7th number discusses about commercial refrigerator and
storage freezers. And 8th one represents about commercial powered food preparation equipment
and the 12th one talks about the automatic ice making equipment.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:14)
And the number 13 represents refuse processes and processing system and 18 number talks about
the manual food, beverage dispensing equipment and 20th one discusses about commercial bulk
milk dispensing equipment. 21 thermoplastic refuse containers, 25 vending machines for food
and beverages, so whatever we use in our cafeterias and 29 discusses about the detergent and
chemical feeders for commercial spray type dishwashing machines. 
And 35 discusses about high pressure decorative laminates for surfacing food service equipment
and 51 talks about this one is specifically food equipment and materials. So, this is as an example
I just put it, so you can also browse in their website to get to in detail because here in 1 hour
class to discuss about the main points given in each particular title would be bit difficult. So, I
request you to check in their website, so if you want to know anything in depth further.(Refer Slide Time: 22:31)
So, whatever we have discussed about 6 organizations, sanitation related organization, so they
are  nothing  but  3A  Sanitary  Standards,  National  Sanitation  Foundation,  Underwriters
Laboratories,  International  Organization  for  Standardization,  American  National  Standards
Institute and European Hygienic Design Group. 
So, though we have seen bit different in their standard practices and the guidelines, so the
ultimate aim of each organization is to ensure the food safety. And safe food processing and food
handling  equipments.  So, as  we have seen every organization  got their  own standards and
practices, so discussing them one by one would be very vast because the course is all about the
processing.(Refer Slide Time: 23:25)
So, here we are going to see the general aspects of sanitary design, so which was mostly derived
from all these standards and practices developed by sanitation related organizations. So, instead
of discussing each one of them under the title, so we are going to put it in a generalized format,
so that we get to know the basic standards and good manufacturing practices.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:51)
The first one is the sanitary construction and design of food equipment, so what are all the
general aspects we need to take care. The surface of food equipment can be categorized into 2,
one is food product contact surface, another one is non-product contact surface. The food productcontact surface is defined as a surface in direct contact with the food residue or where the food
residue can drip, drain and diffuse or be drawn. So, the surface in which the direct contact with
food residue can drip, drain, diffuse or be drawn, is defined as a food product contact surface by
FDA, the Food and Drug Administration.
So, these surfaces if contaminated, can directly result in food product contamination, and rigid
sanitary design criteria must be met before going for food processing. And non-product contact
surfaces are those that are part of the equipment, example is legs, supports, and housings and
these non-product contact surfaces can cause indirect contamination of the food product and
these surfaces cannot be ignored with regard to sanitary designs. 
So, we cannot neglect these non-product contact surfaces, so one example I have told you, in one
of the dryer, so one particular dryer has a door, so when we keep the material inside so there
maybe the environment around it also may lead to contamination. So, that is where this particular
point is discussed here. The non-product contact surfaces can cause indirect contamination of the
food product and these surfaces cannot be ignored with regard to sanitary design.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:41)
So,  the  food contact  surfaces  maybe  coated  with  metal  alloy  or non-metal,  so example  is
ceramics, plastics and rubber. So, they should be very smooth and impervious and free of cracks
and  crevices  and non-porous, non-absorbent  and  non-contaminating,  non-reactive,  corrosion
resistant, durable and maintenance free, nontoxic and easily cleanable. So, these are all thecharacteristics one would look for any food contact surfaces coated with metal alloy or non-
metal. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:21)
So, these food contact material coatings require 3A standards, so that maintains the corrosion
resistance and free of surface delamination and free of surface pitting and free of surface flaking,
free of surface chipping, free of surface blistering and free of surface distortion. So, there are 3A
standards so which talks about all these characteristics for coatings which is applied on the food
contact surfaces. And any other modification or process is used in fabrication, so that means
welding sometimes, bonding or soldering, it should be done using appropriate materials and in a
matter that ensures the final surface meets the sanitary design criteria.
So, intermediately if we apply any modification or any process modification or any surface
modification, so in between if we apply any process modification or the food contacting surface
modification, so examples are welding, soldering. So, we suppose to take care there as well the
sanitary  design  criteria.  So,  that  means  we  suppose  to  use  appropriate  materials  for  such
modification in a manner to ensure the final surfaces meets the sanitary design criteria. So, the
property of this food contact materials, should comply the standards of workability, compatibility
and sanitary design features. So, what are all these food contact materials, that we are going to
see now.(Refer Slide Time: 28:02)
So, the first and foremost is the metals. So, in the metals always the stainless steel one are
preferred, so because of their corrosion resistance and durability in most of the food applications.
And the properties of stainless steel alloy are related to its relative composition with regard to
chromium and nickel level. So, based on their chromium and nickel level in the alloy, so the
properties would vary. So, the corrosion resistance vary with the chromium level. The amount of
the chromium in the stainless steel alloy determines the corrosion resistance power and the
structural strength varies with the nickel level.
So,  based  on  the  nickel  percentage  their  structural  strength  is  enhanced  or  decreased.  So,
example  would be American  Iron and Steel  Institute,  AISI, so they introduced  300 Series
stainless steel, so commonly recommended for food contact surfaces and it termed as 18 by 18
indicating 18 percentage chromium and 8 percentage nickel. So, this contributes to corrosion
resistance, this contributes to their structural strength. So, this as AISI standards so that is used
for stainless steel as a food contact surfaces. So, if we say 18 by 8, so it requires chromium upon
nickel. So, 18 percentage chromium and 8 percentage nickel.(Refer Slide Time: 29:31)
So, 3A sanitary standards require 316, so stainless steel SS316 we require, so this is nothing but
18 percentage chromium and 10 percentage nickel. Stainless steel for most of the food contacting
surfaces and 3 naught 4 stainless steel only for utility usages, utility means in pipes. And there
should not be any usage of 3 naught 3 stainless steel, so 3 naught 3 stainless steel is banned for
food  contacting  surfaces.  So,  most  widely  used  are  SS316  which  has  got  18  percentage
chromium and 10 percentage nickel and 3 naught 4 stainless steel are used for utility usages, so
example is in pipe. 
And 3A standards also provides specifications regarding alloys and other coatings and used in
fabrication. So, these 3A standards not only provide the food contacting surface material, so they
also  provide  the  specifications  regarding  alloys  and  other  coatings  used  for  various  food
contacting surface materials  fabrication. And under conditions where chromium oxide layer
which is a non-reactive, is altered so that means, so here what we are doing in the surface of the
steel is, we are coating it with the alloy, so in that there is a chromium, so which forms the
chromium oxide layer.
So, in the steel if the chromium is there when the oxygen is contacting into it, so this chromium
oxide layer is formed and it acts as a insulator, means non-reactive surface. So, if it is altered in
any of those activities, what are all they, the incompatible cleaners, abrasive cleaners or abrasive
cleaning pads or chlorine and related sanitizers, then these surfaces be passivated, means usingnitric acid or other oxidizing agents initially, after any surface repair, polishing or working and
on a regular basis.
So, here we also need to be careful, it is not only the usage of correct food contacting surface
materials, even after the use, when prolonged use is there, there may be a chance for the
corrosion to happen. So, one such example is this example, so even though this chromium oxide
layer is formed in the 316 or 3 naught 4 stainless steel food contacting surfaces, so these
activities of incompatible cleaners or abrasive cleaners or abrasive cleaning pads, so they further
cause the alterations in the chromium oxide layer. So, that further lead to contamination. 
So, the recommended practice is that, the surfaces to be passivated using nitric acid or other
strong oxidizing agents initially, after that any surface repair, polishing or working we need to do
on a regular basis to take care, prolonged usage of the same food contacting metal materials.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:47)
The next one is titanium, so they are used for their excellent durability and corrosion resistance,
so especially in an acidic environment. But the disadvantage is their high cost and they are used
in stainless steel alloys for food equipment in handling with high acid or salt content. So, the
high acid food or salt content food is, food are citrus juice, tomato products, etcetera. 
And the next one is platinum, so they also got excellent corrosion resistant property but the
disadvantage is their high cost. And the next on is gold, so they are approved as a food contact
surface in certain 3A sanitary standards. So, they are also used for soldering optical sensor, so
example is optical fibre, into stainless steel fittings and resistance to abrasion and compatibility
with glass. 
So, they are resistant to abrasion, so here we have seen, abrasive cleaning. So, if we use the
stainless steel, so abrasive cleaning further removes the non-reactive layer of chromium oxide
and leads to corrosion but if we use gold surfaces, so there may not be any abrasion and they also
compatible with the glass materials.(Refer Slide Time: 34:12)
And the next one is copper which is used in the brewing industry, some use for cheese vats in
Swiss cheese manufacturing due to traditional use. And when processing acid products, copper
residues can leach into product. So, this is the disadvantage but copper is being used even in our
kitchen utensils, from long time onwards. 
So, that is what here it is said, it is mostly used in brewing industry and still in Swiss cheese
manufacturing,  so to traditionally  manufacture  the Swiss cheese, so still  these copper food
contacting surfaces are being used. And when processing with the acid products, we should be
extra careful because the copper residues can leach into product. 
The next one is aluminium, which is used in certain parts and components where lighter weight
is desired, so this we have discussed in the canning operations itself. So, aluminium has poor
corrosion resistance and can become pitted, pitting corrosions and cracked upon continual use.
And  in  most  food  contacting  applications,  aluminium  must  be  coated  with  the  acceptable
material. So, otherwise we cannot use it because they are very much prone to corrosion.
The plastic coatings such as polytetrafluoroethylene, so which is nothing but a Teflon coating are
common with the aluminium material. Then carbonized metal and cast iron, they are used for
only frying and cooking surfaces, not for any manufacturing  equipment  practices.  And the
galvanized iron should be avoided as a food contacting surface because it is highly reactive withacids. So, these particular galvanized iron materials will not be used at all in the or not used at all
in the food contact materials. 
(Refer Slide Time: 36:12)
So, as a food contact materials, first one what we have seen is the metals, the most preferred one
is stainless steel. Among stainless steel so the 300 series varieties, 316 so that is most widely
used and 3 naught 4 is used in utility usages. And also care should be taken when we use
abrasive  cleaning  or  the  chlorine  and  related  sanitizers  in  stainless  steel  food  processing
equipments because that may lead to disruption of the non-reactive chromium oxide layer and
lead to further corrosion. (Refer Slide Time: 36:51)
And next one is titanium, titanium is used for its excellent durability and corrosion resistance and
also they are added in the stainless steel alloy and disadvantage is they are high cost. Platinum
also got excellent corrosion resistance but high cost. The gold is also same standard, so they are
especially used in soldering optical sensors and so they have got good resistance to abrasion and
also they are compatible with the glass material. 
(Refer Slide Time: 37:24)
And copper from ancient time we are using but we should not use with the acid products, there
may be chances for copper residues to leach into product. Aluminium, so we have already seenin the canning operations itself but its disadvantage is its poor corrosion resistance. So, it should
be coated with Teflon coating to use as a food contacting surface in the food manufacturing
equipment. And carbonized metal and cast iron, especially or uniquely used for frying and
cooking surfaces only. Galvanized iron, strict no as a food contact surface.
(Refer Slide Time: 38:03)
So, the next one is non-metals. So, non-metal category what are all there, so the probes, gaskets
and membranes, so they are a variety of non-metal materials are used as food contact surface in
specific applications of food equipment. It is not in the main equipment, but as a probes, gaskets
and membranes, but still they are in contact with the food material. They should meet the same
sanitary standard, so because it is a probe there are no separate sanitary design because it is also
in contact with the food and cleanability requirements as metals.
So, these non-metal surfaces, also needs the same sanitary design and cleanability requirements
as metals required when used in applications as described by 3A sanitary standards and other
standards. And lack of corrosion resistance and durability of metal surfaces. So, these are non-
metals, they lack in corrosion resistance as well as their durability and maintenance programs
should  include  frequent  examination  for  wear  and  deterioration  under  continued  use  and
replacement as appropriate. 
This is what we have seen in the stainless steel itself, even in the metal contacting surfaces, so
this is very much required. At regular interval we should be examining the surfaces for anyfurther wear and deterioration. And plastics, rubber and rubber like materials, so they are used as
a non-metal food contacting surface materials. So, the 3A standards 18-03 and 20-20, discusses
about the non-metals as a food contacting surfaces. So, what are all the standards to be used for
non-metals as the food contacting surfaces. 
(Refer Slide Time: 40:00)
The other non-metallic food contacting surface materials are the ceramics, glasses, paper and
wood. The ceramics are used primarily in membrane filtration system, so that we have seen and
other limited applications are if wear resistance is necessary. And glass is also used as a food
contact surface but the problem is breakage. Must be durable, break resistant or heat resistantglass. So, to be used in the food contacting surface, the specially formulated glass materials, such
as Pyrex, have proven it successful as a food contacting surface. Some applications where glass
is used are light and sight openings, so to check what is happening inside in the vessels and in
very limited glass piping applications. 
Sometimes the glass piping column is also there. One of the applications we have discussed
about the tracer particle inside the, tracer particle we are sending it to determine the velocity
profile. In such cases, so we may go for the glass piping to see what is happening inside the
piping system or vessels. And paper, the gasket material in piping system designed for daily
disassembly and it is a single use material, so we cannot use it for continual usage. 
And wood is highly porous and difficult to clean, so because of which it is not widely used and
exception is what we have is hardwood cutting board, at kitchen. So, non-metal wise the plastics,
rubber and rubber like materials and ceramics, glasses, papers and wood. Wood and paper are
not mostly used, paper is a single usage material, wood is exceptionally we use it for cutting or
any size reduction operations in the food processing place.
(Refer Slide Time: 41:57)
And the next one is surface texture and finish. The surface is grounding, polishing or texturing,
so they must be done so that the final surface is smooth, durable and free of crack and crevices.
So, this I talked about in even when we were discussing about the thermal processing equipmentsitself. So, the equipment surface in which the food is contacting should be smooth, durable, free
of cracks and crevices and meets also the sanitary design requirements. 
And 3A sanitary standards needs ground or polished stainless steel surfaces meet a number 4
ground surface and unpolished surfaces meet a number 2B or mill finish. So, the standards which
talks about the polished stainless steel and unpolished one are, the polished one is number 4 and
the unpolished one is number 2B. 
The 3A sanitary standards development group, recently adopted an industry recognized method
for determining an acceptable food contact surface termed roughness average or Ra value. So,
we are telling that like the surface should be smooth, what is the parameter to check whether the
surface is smooth or not, so this 3A sanitary standards development group, so they came up with
the recognition method. So, that is nothing but here the 3A sanitary standards development group
came  up  with  a  method  to  determine  the  acceptable  food  contact  surface,  so  in  terms  of
roughness average or Ra value.
So, Ra is determined using a sensitive instruments, which is nothing but a profilometer, which
employs a diamond tipped stylus to measure peaks and valleys in a relatively smooth surface. So,
the 3A sanitary standards development group, developed a method, so to check for acceptability
of food contact surface whether that is smooth or not, so that factor is nothing but or the method
is nothing but the roughness average or Ra value method. 
So, this Ra value is determined by sensitive instrument, which is nothing but a profilometer, so
which employs a diamond tipped stylus to measure peaks and valleys, so if there are any peaks
and valleys so that means the surface is not a smooth one. So, we can directly get to know from
the roughness average or Ra value, which is measured by profilometer.(Refer Slide Time: 44:37)
Then the construction and fabrication. The food equipment should be designed and fabricated in
such a way that all food contact surfaces are free of sharp corners and crevices. So, this also we
have discussed. In terms of pressure also, we should avoid the sharp corners and crevices. The
mating surfaces must also be continuous, so to give substantially flush. And all food handling or
processing equipment should allow for easy disassembly for cleaning and inspection, so this also
we discussed enormously in most of the lectures. 
And equipment should be self- draining, the vessels, chambers  and tanks  and pitched to a
drainable port with no potential hold up of food materials or solutions. So, this we discussed in
the pasteurization also, there should not be any food chunk, that is why the holding tube is
sloped, it is not a horizontal one, it is a sloped tube. So, here the equipment should be self-
draining and pitched to a drainable port with no potential hold up of food material or solutions.(Refer Slide Time: 45:46)
So, these are all certain diagrams or pics to get to know which one is acceptable and which one is
not acceptable. The piping system not designed for routine disassembly must be sloped to drain.
So, the piping system not designed for routine disassembly must be sloped to drain. So, one such
example  is  your  holding  tube,  in  sterilization  operation  or  pasteurization  operation,  so  the
unacceptable designs are these one. So, here you are not getting the direct draining and here the
design is in such a way that you may get some hold ups of the material, so this is straight one.
So, the acceptable designs are the sloped one, so here also the sloped one and the piping system
installed in modern food processing industries designed for a cleaning-in-place, CIP technique,
require special consideration and close monitoring with regard to drainage. So, this also in
certain lectures I have discussed, even though there is a technique CIP, clean-in-place, so if the
particular surface needs proper cleaning or to be taken care especially then we apply the manual
cleaning there or even after CIP is done, then there is a extra care or monitoring with regard to
drainages required and also check whether that particular surface is cleaned properly or not.(Refer Slide Time: 47:28)
Then the internal angles should be curved or rounded with defined radii, so here it is nothing but
a square corner, sharp edges, so that should be avoided, it should be of particular radii. So, the
curved means which angle or which radii it should be curved, so that is what that defined radii. 
The equipment standards specify the appropriate radii for specific equipment applications and
components, so based on a specific equipment application and components, so this radii is
defined by 3A standards. So, the radii requirements, 3A standards requirements are suggested by
3A standards, indicate that all internal angles should be of 135 degree or less should have a
minimum radii of 1 by 4th inch, so that means 6.35 millimetre.
Smaller  radii  are  allowed  by  standards  where  needed  for  function  within  the  certain
specifications. So, most of the time we should go by the radii requirements which is given by 3A
sanitary standards but whether any certain applications or certain requirements needed, then we
should go for smaller one. So, if it given as 1 by 4th inch, so the allowed one is less than that, not
more than that. The smaller radii are allowed by standards where needed for function within the
certain specifications.(Refer Slide Time: 49:04)
And all joints should be smooth, durable and meet all sanitary design criteria, so one such is the
unacceptable one is lap weld, acceptable one is butt weld. And here in the joints there should not
be any sharp ends, so it should be also coved, so this is acceptable one. And equipment standards
generally require that welded joints on stainless steel surfaces be continuous, butt-type joints and
ground to at least as smooth as a number 4 finish, number 4 finish is again standard to be used in
welding practices. +If the welded joints is at a corner, it must be coved to the appropriate radius
and ground smooth, so this is what I told. And soldered joints  applied only for non-toxic
materials, otherwise it is not preferred method of construction or fabrication.(Refer Slide Time: 49:59)
Ensuring the connection does not create a dead end, so we should also be careful about the
connection does not create a dead end or an area where the food product can accumulate and is
not accessible to cleaning solutions. So, this also we discussed in the dryers, the food contacting
surfaces should not have any crevices or cracks or pits. And pipe connection should not be of
length greater than one pipe diameter. So, the pipe connection should not be of length greater
than one pipe diameter. 
The shafts, bearings, agitators, and other attachments or ancillary components should be attached
to food equipment in such a way that there is no leakage of lubricants or other contaminants into
the product zone, so that there should not be any leakage of lubricants or other contaminants.
And such components should be accessible and removable for cleaning. And so any such things
are happening, it should be cleaned then and there, so and also the equipment should give a room
for such access.
And any opening or cover should be designed, fabricated and constructed in such a way that,
they  adequately  protect  the  food  products  from  contamination  and  to  divert  the  potential
contamination away from the food product zone. The cover, the sealing also should be done in
such a way that it should protect the food products from contamination and to divert the potential
contamination away from the food zone.(Refer Slide Time: 51:43)
And  non-product  contact  surfaces  of  food  equipment  are  a  well  documented  source  for
environmental contamination of a food facility with pathogens, so these are non-product contact
surfaces. In the product contact surfaces, we have seen 2 varieties one is metals and another one
is non-metals and we have also seen certain general standards and practices and guidelines used
for construction and fabrication. So, now we are discussing about non-product contact surfaces,
so these also well documented source for environmental contamination as well as the pathogens.
And these areas can also be harbourage areas for insects and rodents. And non-product surfaces
of equipment should be constructed with appropriate materials and fabricated in such a manner
as to be reasonably cleanable and corrosion resistant and maintenance free, so whatever we
discussed till now that is also holds true for non-product contact surface. 
The tubular steel equipment framework should be entirely sealed and not penetrated, so this is
important. So, they should be sealed properly and if there are any attachments, they should be
welded to the surface and not by drilled or tapped holes. And ledges or areas where dust can
collect should be avoided in the non-product contact surfaces and tops of equipment, shield,
covers or boxes should be sloped around 45 degree. The legs of the equipment should be sealed
at base and not to be hallow and the threads used in levelling components should be of the
enclosed type.(Refer Slide Time: 53:31)
And finally the food equipment installation, so they should be installed in a logical sequence to
avoid any cross contamination issue and the space around and between equipment and between
equipment and walls should be adequate enough to allow for sufficient cleaning. Unless sealed to
walls, the food equipment should be at least 4 inches from the walls. And the floor mounted
equipment should be sealed to the floor, platform, or pedestal or should be no less than 6 inches
from the floor. 
So, they should be sealed to the floor and platform or pedestal or should be no less than 6 inches
from the floor. And table mounted equipment should be sealed to the table or be no less than no
less than 4 inches from the counter top. So, these are certain regulations and standards followed
in a food equipment installation.(Refer Slide Time: 54:33)
So, these are the references and additional resources, so most of the points were taken from this
particular reference. And so here in the second part, first one we have discussed about the
different sanitation related organizations and we discussed about what they were mainly working
on and certain of their guidelines and practices along with the title, that you can access in their
website itself because it will be very heavy to discuss each and every title. 
And the second part of this lecture we have put the common guidelines, practices used in the
food  processing  equipment.  So,  we  have  done  as  of  different  categories,  one  is  on  food
contacting surfaces and food non-contacting surfaces. In food contacting  surfaces, we have
discussed about metals as well as non-metals. Then non-contacting surfaces also follow almost
same but maybe little less strict guidelines which are used for the contacting surfaces. And also
we  discussed  about  the  construction,  fabrication  of  the  food  processing  equipment  and
installation of the equipment. So, these are all general criteria, but if you get to know in depth
about each and every standard, so you may refer into their particular website. Thank you.