Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor. R. Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
Lecture No 22
Various types of Dryers for Food Process Engineering
Good morning everyone, today’s lecture and we are going to talk about the various types of
dryers for food process engineering.
(Refer Slide Time: 0:42)  
So this lecture and the previous lectures talks about the major processing equipment in for
process industry. So one is dryers, the second one is the heat exchangers. So you also might
have seen in many of the lectures we were talking about mainly in the continuous flow
process  heat  exchanger,  a  plate  type  heat  exchanger.  And  also  we  have  seen  design
procedures as well. So these two lectures are about that. 
So what are all various types of dryers used in food processing industry as well as the heat
exchanging equipment used, which is nothing but a heat exchangers which are used in food
industries. Before going into various types of dryers, we also going to see about the very
basic mechanism of drying and how to calculate the drying time. Then after that we discuss
three to four types of various dryers used in the food industries.(Refer Slide Time: 1:43)  
So  the  first  the  process  of  drying,  what  does  it  mean  by  drying?  It  is  also  called  as
dehydration. So, which is defined as the application of heat under controlled conditions to
remove the majority of the water normally present in a food by evaporation. So drying mains
the application of heat under controlled conditions to remove the majority of the water. So
this is very much important, normally present in the food by evaporation. So this is done at
using heat.
So, if you use the freezing phenomena. So that is also called freezed drying. So there the
mechanism is sublimation, by sublimation we do freeze-drying, but here by evaporation, the
majority of the water is removed, because we are concerned about the thermal processing. So
by applying heat how to evaporate the water from the surface of the food particle.
The main purpose of dehydration are drying is to extend the shelf life of foods by reduction
in water activity. So we are doing here the water activity reduction. And it inhibits microbial
growth and enzyme activity, but the process in temperature right, whatever the heat we apply
that temperature, processing temperature is usually insufficient to cause their inactivation. So
this is another important thing to remember, by drying we adjusted using the microbial
growth or enzyme activities. 
But we are not killing any microorganism because the processing temperature, which is
applied in drying is not sufficient enough to inactivate the microorganisms. And any increase
in moisture content during storage, for example due to faulty packaging, will result in rapidspoilage. So the drying near the main aim is to remove the moisture content, to reduce or do
inhibits the microbial growth or enzyme activity. But since it is not inactivating so there is a
possibility for recontamination.
So for example, after the storey, after the drying if the product is being stored in the storage
unit, so that time if it grouts the moisture content, then the food may get spoiled right. So it
cannot guarantee the spoilage during storage. It just that it removes the water by that way. It
inhibits the microbial growth and enzyme activity. But after drying, so we need to take care
of the further decontamination level.
(Refer Slide Time: 4:24)  
The reduction in weight and bulk of food reduces transport and storage costs. So that means,
so if we remove the majority of water right and that reduces the weight of the product and
also the bulk of food, bulk of food in the sense it tats. Because water density is thousand KG
per metre cube. So it adds weight right. So that is reduced and it will be very easy for us to
transport and storage.
And provides convenient product for the consumer or more easily handled ingredients for
food processors. Obviously, if you remove the water content, the water activity of the food
product is reduced. So in that way, it is convenient product for the consumer and also for the
food processors, it is very easily handle able. Because the lot of weight of the product is
reduced.It causes the deterioration of both the eating quality and the nutritional value of the food
right. Since we are applying the thermal process which is done by hardier at particular
temperature. It also or it may cause deterioration for the eating quality and the nutritional
value. Dryers aim to minimise these changes by selection of appropriate drying conditions for
individual foods right.
So this is in my hand right, if you remember our earlier classes, we also talk about the time
temperature combination right. The one of the major disadvantage in the thermal processing
is nothing but a the temperature, high temperature due to which the nutritional value of the
food gets deteriorated and sometimes it gives the overcooking. That is not appealing for the
consumers to consume the food right.
So this temperature combination, time temperature combination I can play with. So that is a
way  we  told  the  load  temperature,  high  time  process  and  high-temperature,  short  time
process. So all the processes we have discussed to, how to play with time temperature
combination to get or to regain the eating quality and nutritional value. The same thing is
applicable here because, by the way, I can take care of my drying conditions for individual
foods. I can give better eating quality and nutritional value for the food.
So, the examples for dried foods are coffee, milk, raisins and other fruits. This is very much
famous dry fruits and pasta, flours, these flours  includes the bakery mixes, beans, pulses,
nods, breakfast cereals, tea and spices. And egg powder, flavourings and colourings, lactose,
sucrose or fructose powder, enzymes and yeasts. So everything comes as a dried powder with
and reduced water activity not to contaminate further.
(Refer Slide Time: 7:24)  So then we told about the basics of drying, in the drying what are all the care should be given
to get the better eating quality and not to degrade the nutritional value. And now we are going
to see about the dryers right, the equipment used and what are all the measures I need to care
about while selecting the particular dryer.
A dryer used for drying food should not be of such a nature that the food is in danger of
becoming unfit for human consumption after drying. So this is also another thing, after drying
it should not have any contamination or it should not be unfit for human consumption. And
the planning of a dehydration plant is just as important as the design of the dryer. So this
design of dryer we have while discussing in the previous lecture itself we told, there is
something called GMP, the good manufacturing practices. 
So  any  design  of  thermal  equipment  in  the  food  processing  should  follow  the  good
manufacturing practices. So now, it is told that it is not only the dryer and the dehydration
plant itself. Because if there is any previous contamination in the dehydration plant. So this
also affects the drying operation. For example, we are just keeping the food inside the dryer
and taking out after the drying operation. The environment of the dehydration plant is not
contamination free, then it will be a dangerous for drying operations as well. So a good dryer
can be dangerous if planning is bad. So that means the plant is also should be contamination
free.
Mechanization and automation have made great progress in the cleaning of the dryer, both
batch and continuous, previously cleaned manually. So the cleaning operation right, this wediscussed in the pasteurizer itself. The cleaning is very much important because we also told
that the each particle should be at the particular pasteurization temperature. 
If  any  food  chunks,  by  chance  left  in  the  pasteurizer  it  will  add  as  a  seed  for  the
contamination. Same thing here, previously these dryers were cleaned by manually. Now we
are applying the automotive control that is nothing but a cleaning in place. So when you do
the automation in the cleaning process. We also need to be ensuring the cleaning is done
properly right.
Earlier, the machines were opened every day, and if certain parts were not especially hygienic
they were given extra cleaning. So this is possible in the manual right. So we know certain
parts need extra cleaning, earlier the machines were opened every day and wherever the extra
care or extra cleaning is needed that was done manually. But in modern dryers we employ
CIP with computer controls. But here also, if there is any parts of the dryer needs extra
cleaning that can be done manually after the CIP with the computer control.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:35)  
To produce microbiologically safe dehydrated foods, a hygienically designed dryer is needed.
So this is important because all other industries, even chemical industries uses the dryers in
very much frequent or in every almost all industry uses the dryers. But there, I need not take
care of the hygienic part because the production of chemicals. So maybe purity is needed, but
we do not much bother about the hygienic conditions in the dryer. But in food process
industries the same dryers were used but the hygienic part I need to give extra care because
the food is going to be consumed after the drying process.The dryer itself can be main source of bacterial contamination of foods, if the design and
fabrication do not confirm to high levels of hygienic standards. So while designing and
fabrication itself we needed to take it because the bacteria contamination wherever it occurs,
we have seen in the  pasteurization as well as sterilisation itself, the holding tube, why it
should be at some slope and also we have seen the valves and places where the possibility of
milk chunks to be stay. 
So that should be cleaned properly right, here also the bacterial contamination can occur in
the dryer as well. Wherever there is room for crevices or dead areas right. So they have to be
taken care while designing itself, design and fabrication should not leave such a crevices or
dead areas for the bacterial contamination. Because if food chunks go and stay there, then it
adds a further bacterial contamination.
Hygiene in the dryer is necessary to prevent food poisoning and to reduce the food spoilage.
So, hygiene part is very much important. A well-designed dryer is accompanied by a sound
instruction for its installation, operation, cleaning and maintenance. So this is to be designed,
while design and fabricate dryer itself.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:46)  
So to insure that it can be freed from relevant microorganisms, the dryer must be properly
cleaned before process begins. Where crevices or and dead areas cannot be avoided for
functional reasons, equipment may have to be dismantled for cleaning right. So we told while
designing and fabricating dryer itself. We need to take care of these crevices or dead areas,
but for functional reasons or functional flexibility of the dryer. If these have to be there in the design of dryer, then we need to ensure the equipment can be
easily dismantled for any extra cleaning. Because these areas need extra cleaning, if we are
not able to provide that by CIP, at least we need to dismantle the unit for further cleaning by
manual.
Care must be taken to prevent the contamination of foods with rodenticide and pesticides
residues. Sometimes whatever we use for the cleaning itself may stay in the dryer, so that
adds a further contamination of the food because that may be poisonous as well. So that also
the care should be given there as well.
Three basic factors that are important for hygienic dryer design are actual design, fabrication
and finish, this we told here itself, we can check whether any dead areas can be avoided, can
be avoided and materials of construction. So this is we need to ensure this is smooth surface
because any pits are crevices adds the further contamination. And cleaning system adopted
for the maintenance of the dryer normally CIP is supplied. So, if needed there has to be a
manual cleaning and the design of dryer should give the room for manual cleaning. Because
it should be disassembled or dismantled for cleaning and it is easy to dismantle for manual
cleaning. So this also another basic factor.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:00)  
So the safe practices are also being ensured while designing a dryer. So one thing is the
surfaces in contact with the food should be inert to the food under the conditions of use, and
the constituents from their surface must not migrate into the food or be observed by the foodin quantities which could endanger the health. So this is the where your food materials are
kept inside the dryer where the place.
For example, we have a tray, in that tray your food materials are kept. So the surfaces should
not react with the food material or any constituents from. For example, the food materials,
some component in the food material will react with the material used in the tray right. So if
there is any reaction between the food and the surface where the food particles are kept for
drying there should not be any reaction or there should not be any corrosion which further
leads the components transfer between the food material and the surface.
All surfaces in contact with the food must be smooth, nonporous. Because it should also
avoid that any pores in the surface of the tray, where your food materials are kept right. So
that particles of food, bacteria, or insect eggs are not caught in microscopic surface crevices
and become difficult to dislodge, thus become a potential source of contamination. 
So one thing we may be argued is like, even though it is porous or the surfaces is not smooth
for functional reasons. Then there may be a cleaning which takes care of removing the food
chunks from the pores or from the rough surface right. But, sometimes what may so happen is
in the pores the food materials gets lodged and it cannot be cleaned properly, even if you
apply manual cleaning. So as far as possible the surface where the food materials are kept
should be very smooth and it should be nonporous.
All  surfaces  in  contact  with  food  can  be  readily  disassembled  for  manual  cleaning.  In
accordance with the current practice, CIP techniques are preferred with computer-control. But
this is not practice able that design must follow for the ready dismantling of the relevant parts
of the dryer for manual cleaning. So as we said here if certain parts need manual cleaning, so
we supposed to give extra care or extra cleaning certain parts. Then the design of dryer
should give the provision to dismantle or disassemble the dryer for extra cleaning.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:59)  The dryer must be so designed as to protect the contents from the external contamination,
including accidental ingress of foreign matter, for example, bolts, nuts, washers, gaskets. So
this also should be contamination free because these are all the small components which are
used in the dryers. It is not only the drying surface. The bolts, nuts, washers, gaskets are also
should be contamination free.
The exterior or nonproduct contact surface should be arranged so to prevent harboring of
soils, bacteria or pests in and on the equipment itself as well as in its contact with the other
equipment, and as far as possible with the floors, walls, hanging supports. So this is where I
told the dehydration plant itself. Okay, so certain dryers what we do is we have a the
conveying mechanism right. So, with which the dryer trays where kept inside okay. So this is
the way we start the trays inside the dryer. 
So when these parts are coming from the outside to inside the dryer. So there may be a
chance for contamination it brings right. So it is not only the particular dryer the whole
environment of the dehydration plant should be contamination free. Otherwise when it is in
contact with the outside surfaces or when it is contact with the other equipment. For example,
after drying it will go to storage and distribution right.
So there also this line has to go to further storage and distribution unit. So in between also,
there should not be any contamination. So for the dryer where the food materials comes from
and after drying wet the food material goes that also should be contamination free to ensure
the hygienic in the dryer.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:00)  So we have seen five best safe practices, one is the surface that the food material is kept
should  not  be  reacting  with  the  food  material  and  the  surface  should  be  smooth  and
nonporous and when certain parts of the dryer needs extra manual cleaning for functional
reasons.  The  CIP  techniques  or  the  design  of  dryer  should  ensure  the  dryer  can  be
disassembled and dismantled very easily and further assembled add mantled without any
difficulty.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:33)  
And also it is not only the drying surface and also the bolts, nuts, washers, gaskets also
should be contamination free. And not only the dryer for the dryer where the materials comes
from and from the dryer where the material goes that also should be soil free, bacteria free
and pest free. In short, it should be contamination free.(Refer Slide Time: 20:56)  
So the general classification of dryers. So based on particles, slurry, liquid suspension the
dryers can be choosed. In the processing mode whether we want batch or continuous mode.
Based on the mode of heat transfer convection, conduction, electromagnetic radiation and
combination of conduction, convection and electromagnetic radiation. Based on the product
temperature above freezing point or below freezing point. This comes in the freeze-drying. 
Okay, we have seen this is the sublimation and that above freezing point is nothing but the
evaporation. And based on energy source electricity, gas, solar, wind, biomass. Based on
mode  of  operation,  cyclic,  intermittent,  continuous.  And  based  on  operating  pressure,
atmospheric, vacuum and high-pressure.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:48)  And before going into the main classification of dryers or the various dryers used in the
industry, we also should know little bit about psychrometry. I am not going into detail, but
because the drying conditions right. In the first slide itself, we have told the drying conditions
used is very much important to maintain the nutritional value of the food as well as the food
quality right. 
So for that the drying conditions to be chosen. The three parameters important for drying
conditions is relative humidity of the air and temperature of the air, as well as the velocity of
that. When we talk about relative humidity, so we also should know basics about air, water
vapour mixture and what is called moisture content? What is called relative humidity, dry
bulb temperatures, wet bulb temperature?
So we are going to spend a minimum time. So, if you have further interest, please refer any of
the mass transfer book and I also give the references at the end of the slide for further reading
about the psychrometry.
There are large number of factors that control the rate at which food dry. One is processing
condition, nature of the food and dryer design right. So the nature of the food we are by now
know, like low acid food, high acid food and which type of thermal operations to be applied.
So based on nature of the food we are okay with. But based on the processing condition, this
is what we supposed to give certain attention.
And based on the dryer design because already designed and we are not going to discuss
anything  deep  about  dryer  design,  except  drying  time  how  to  choose.  There  are  three
interrelated factors that control the capacity of air to remove moisture from a food. So this iswhere I told, one is amount of water vapour already carried by the air. So this we can get to
know from the relative humidity. 
And air temperature and amount of air that passes over the food. So we can call it as a mass
flow rate or if you fix the drying surface area then it may be a velocity as well right. So the
velocity and air temperature as well as the relative humidity. So the moment I talk about the
relative humidity which is nothing but amount of water vapour in air expressed as expressed
as either absolute humidity which termed as a moisture content or relative humidity which is
measured in percentage. So this will be given by kg upon kg. Kg of water vapour per kg of
air.
And psychrometry is the study of interrelated properties of air-water vapour system and these
properties are conveniently represented as a psychrometric chart. Okay, so that you are going
to see.(Refer Slide Time: 24:45)  
This is the psychrometric chart. So, if you see here in x-axis what you see is the dry bulk
temperature right. So what is dry bulb temperature? The temperature of the air, measured by
thermometer bulb, is termed as the dry bulb temperature. So what we normally measure at
labs. So that is nothing but a dry bulk temperature, which is in degrees centigrade.
And in the slanting y-axis it is given as a wet bulb temperature right. So what is wet bulb
temperature? If the thermometer bulb is surrounded by a wet cloth, heat is removed by
evaporation of water from the cloth and the temperature falls. So this lower temperature is
called  wet  bulb  temperature.  Here  in  the  thermometer  we  wind  the  wet  cloth  in  the
thermometer bulb, so the heat is used to remove the water from the wet cloth by evaporation.So,  the  temperature  measured  is  lower  than  the  dry  bulb  temperature.  So  that  is  here
mentioned as a wet bulb temperature. 
Then the difference between the two temperature is used to find the relative humidity, relative
humidity on the psychrometric chart. For example, if I fix my dry bulb temperature as 55 and
my wet bulb temperature is 35. So the 35 line is here right and my dry bulb temperature of 55
degree line is here. So if you keep this, so this is nothing but, from this, I can calculate
relative humidity, how?
So this is 30 percentage relative humidity line and this is 20 percentage relative humidity line.
So what we have seen is dry bulb 55 and wet bulb 35 right. So wet bulb 35 and dry bulb 55.
So I put this is a 0.1 here. Okay, so this is a 20 percentage relative humidity line, this is 30
percentage relative humidity line. So, if you go from here it is around maybe I can say the 28
percentage okay. So from dry bulb and wet bulb I can fix the or I can get a know the relative
humidity.
Okay, the dew point is the temperature at which air becomes saturated with moisture right.
The dew point is the temperature at which the air becomes saturated with the moisture. That
means 100 percentage relative humidity and any further cooling from this point results in
condensation of the water from the air. So we have seen here the air, water vapour system
right, so once the dew point is reached right. So there it is a 100 percentage relative humidity.
After that, in water vapour will not stay with the air as the water vapour then it starts
condensing as a water.
And adiabatic cooling lines are the parallel straight sloping across the chart, which shows
how absolute humidity decreases as the air temperature increases. So for example, we have
taken here example as a dry bulb temperature of 55 and wet bulb temperature of 35. So I got
28 percentage relative humidity. So for example if I increase or decrease the temperature. For
example, from 55 to I will go to 45 okay. So 45 if you see in the wet bulb temperature. So
what you get is this point right, 0.2. Okay.
So in the 0.2 if you see. So if you come here in the straight line, maybe around this and this
right. So the 0.2 comes somewhere here and 0.1 comes somewhere here right. So, if you see
the difference right, the 0.1 is that 55 degree dry bulb temperature and wet bulb temperature
of 35 and I am just reducing my dry bulb temperature from 55 to 45. So that gives me the 0.2
so if you extend that line. So what you get is between 0.03 and 0.02 right. So the 0.1 is here,and 0.2 is here. So that difference between them will give me the moisture content that is
what is it is told. Absolute humidity decreases, the air temperature increases.
So the 0.2 is lower temperature, so that is having higher absolute humidity which is nothing
but a moisture content 0.1 is having higher temperature. So that gives me lower moisture
content. So that means 2 minus 1 is nothing but amount of moisture that is removed when
you increase the temperature. Okay, so that is something basic about the psychrometry so we
are not going into detail, we told about the dry bulb temperature, wet bulb temperature by
using dry bulb and wet bulb how to get the relative humidity. 
And this one talks about the moisture content which is nothing but kg upon kg and we also
have seen the adiabatic cooling lines are the parallel straight lines sloping across the chart,
which show how absolute humidity decreases as the air temperature increases. So I fixed my
wet bulb temperature as 35 and I increased the temperature from 45 to 55 by noting it down
in the 0.2 and 0.1.
So 0.2 is lower temperature, which gives the higher moisture content and 55 is the higher
temperature, which gives me lower moisture content. So when you increase the temperature,
your moisture content is decreasing. So that is what it is told here, adiabatic cooling lines are
the  parallel  straight  lines  sloping  across  the  chart,  which  show  how  absolute  humidity
decreases as the air temperature increases.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:49)  
So the next one important thing what we have to know is the drying curve. So in the drying
curve we have 3 regions, region 1, region 2 and region 3. The region 1, we call it as a phase
of rising rate. So this is nothing but where the product is getting warmed or opening pores. So
this is nothing but a phase of rising. So this normally we do not take into account for the
calculation of drying time.
The second and third region are very important. The phase of constant rate, where drying rate
remains  nearly constant as  the water is removed.  And truly concentrate  drying may be
observed when slowly drying wet sand or paper but seldom when drying real foods. So when
drying real foods this may also be avoided for the calculation because that is the very shorter
time or it may not be even observed right. But here the constant rate is nothing but drying
right remains nearly constant as water is removed.
The region 3 is phase of falling rate. So below is certain moisture content a called critical
master  content  which  is  expressed  as  a Xc.  The  drying rate  drops  sharply  as  water  is
removed. So the phase of falling rate is drying rate falls with respect to X, which is nothing
but a moisture content after the critical moisture content is reached.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:14)  
So here is your drying curve. So this phase A, B, we call it as a constant rise or phase of
raising period, raising rate period. So here the product is getting warmed up or product is
preparing its post to be opened. So this is a very short period, we do not normally take into
account for drying calculations. So the C to B is nothing but a constant rate period, constantrate period. And the C to D is nothing but a falling rate period. Okay, so this is nothing but a
Xc.
So normally our final moisture content right, from initial moisture content is nothing but here
Xi. So final moisture content will be Xf. Because the equilibrium moisture content is one
below which I cannot even dream of the water. So my initial final moisture content lies
somewhere here. So this I will take it as TF drying time, this is the initial starting Di equal to
0. So this is what the drying curve, so here it is a moisture content which is nothing but grams
of water per grams of dry matter and N is nothing but a drying rate.
So this is a moisture content, this is drying rate X versus Y and what is the time required for
drying or food from an initial moisture content X1 to a final moisture content X2. So here we
can also tell instead of Xf 2 and instead of Xi, X1, so T1, T2. Okay, so here the phi is nothing
but a drying rate which is nothing but minus DW upon M DT right. So the W upon M is
nothing but kg of water per kg of dry food material. So the W M can be written as X. So phi
is nothing but minus DDT of X, where X is nothing but W upon M.
So, if you do the certain calculations here minus DW is nothing but M into DX. I am taking
these two and writing. So minus DW is nothing but minus MDX. So DT, DT gets cancel.
Then this can also be written as, because if you take these two right, so that can be written as
phi MDT, minus DW is nothing but phi MDT. So from this, I can calculate my T. So phi is
nothing but minus DX, DT. So my DT is nothing but minus DX upon phi. So T is nothing but
minus X1 to X2 DX upon phi.
So this is I can do it 0 to T. So total drying time is nothing but minus X1 to X2 DX upon phi.
So this phi is nothing but a drying rate which is a function of X. X is nothing but moisture
content which is expressed in kg of water per kg of dry matter right. So usually I get by
experimental or by modelling also we can get phi as a function of X. So this has to be further
substituted in the drying time.(Refer Slide Time: 35:46)  
So here it is said that if both X1, X2 are larger than Xc, the entire drying period takes place at
the constant rate. So if you see here, so this way you are moisture content is reducing right.
So if my X1, X2, both is larger than Xc. So that means my X1, X2 comes here, so this is
nothing but called constant rate period. So total drying time is in the constant rate period,
which is nothing but X1 minus X2 upon phi naught, phi naught is nothing but initial drying
rate.
If both X1, X2 are smaller than Xc. So that means so here it lies X1 and X2, so that means it
is in the falling rate period right. So entire drying period takes place in the falling rate period.
So, which is nothing but Xc minus Xe. Xc is critical moisture content, E is nothing butequilibrium moisture content. Phi naught is nothing but initial rate of drying, X2 to X1, X2,
X1 is a initial final moisture content, the X upon X minus Xe. So after integration what you
get is the final formula is this for drying time.
So Xc minus Xe divided by phi naught into log of X1 minus Xe divided by X2 minus Xe. So
this means E is nothing but equilibrium moisture content, X1 is initial moisture content, X2 is
final moisture content. Xc is nothing but a critical moisture content.
If X1 is larger than Xc, X2 is smaller than Xc. So if you see here, so X1 is larger than Xc. So
that means X1 lies here and X2 is smaller than Xc the drying period consist of both the
constant rate as well as falling rate. So constant rate is this formula and remember, X2 is
replaced by Xc. Because the Xc is the final moisture content in the constant rate period. And
your falling rate period stands with Xc minus Xc divided by phi naught into log of Xc minus
Xc. Because the initial moisture content here is replaced by the Xc right, minus Xc divided
by X2 minus Xc. So this is the way we calculate the drying time. 
(Refer Slide Time: 38:06)  
So now, we are going to see the process of drying a little bit and we are going to see what are
all the different dryers used. So what happens is? So this is my food material right, so here I
am sending a hot air. So with particular relative humidity and temperature and velocity right.
So when the air sees the food material, so the process is nothing but a convection okay. So it
forms a boundary layer, boundary layer means the velocity of the. So this is nothing but a
convection boundary layer, convection boundary layer where your velocity varies from 0 to
the free mainstream velocity. Okay, so this process is convection. 
Then what happens the surface moisture of the food gets evaporated right. So this is nothing
but a evaporation operation. So when the heat is applied on the surface of the food and it has
to conduct through the food material right. If it is solid material, the heat has to conduct. So
this process is nothing but a conduction. And my moisture should defuse from the internal
site to surface. So this process is nothing but a diffusion of moisture, diffusion of moisture.
This is conduction of heat, so convection of hot air, evaporation of moisture. So this is what
overall happening in the drying processes right.
So, what we need to take care? The drying conditions and how much time I need to dry?
Right, so drying time and the mechanism is convection of hot air, evaporation of moisture,
conduction of heat inside the material and diffusion of moisture from inside material to the
surface of the food material right. So this is where we have seen. And one particular thing
here we told about why we do not take normally constant rate of drying is.
So here if you see, actually whatever the moisture content is there in the food material surface
is getting evaporated right. So the same rate, the moisture also defuse from the inside materialand it should come to surface of the food material right. If there is any difference between
these rates, then the constant rate period may not even appear right. Because here the in the
constant rate slowest step is rate of evaporation, in the falling rate period the slowest rate
controlling step or rate controlling step or slowest step is diffusion of moisture from the
internal side of the food material to the surface right.
If these two are matched, then the process go smoothly right. So, but in the food material,
most of the time the rate at which the moisture evaporation near the surface may not be
equivalent  to the rate of diffusion of moisture from the internal  to surface  of the food
material. Because of which the constant rate period may not even appear in most of the real
foods. So mostly it will be done under the falling rate period okay.
(Refer Slide Time: 41:47)  
So now, we are going to see the dryers. So normally the hot air dryers this is in general. But
here we are also thinking about the conventional hot air dryers, what are all the measures can
be taken to improve the process as a energy conservation process? One is insulation of
cabinets and ducting that should be done and recirculation of exhaust air right. So whatever
the air going in exhaust that can be recirculated. So, if that we are doing that we need to also
be careful about the outlet temperature can be tolerated by the product. 
Because the exhaust air temperature should be tolerated by the product, it should also be
acceptable for reduction in evaporating capacity. And recovery heat from the exhaust air
directly, it can be recirculated or we can use some heat exchangers and that heat can be usedto fore-warming the feed material or to heat the incoming air. So this way we can improve the
efficiency of the hot air dryers.
(Refer Slide Time: 42:54)  
And use of direct flame heating of natural gas or low nitrogen oxide burners to reduce the
product contamination by the products of combustion right. So, if we use the direct flame or
nitrogen oxide burners, then product contamination can be taken care. And drying in two
stages, one example we told is like the surface moisture can be removed using hot air.
Because the falling rate period right, if the surface moisture which is happening in the
constant rate period stop.
But the falling rate period, if the moisture should be removed we can use any volumetric
heating technique. Because in the falling rate period, the moisture has to defuse from the
inside material to the surface right. So in that case, we can the volumetric heating maybe
microwave heating, so that the drying can be efficient right. So that is what it is told the
drying in two stages, one is by using the hot air or volumetric heating in the falling rate
period and hot air in the constant rate period.
And also it is based on the heating medium used and the amount of moisture removal. For
example, in the bin drying you will be able to 3 to 6 percentage of the moisture. If the
moisture lot, if the high amount of moisture content to be removed. So we can first put
fluidised to bed dryers. Then we can send the dried product from the fluidised bed dryers to the bin dryer to remove
the final moisture content. Okay and also other combination would be spray drying, followed
by  fluidised  bed  drying.  So  it  is  based  on  the  amount  of  moisture  removal  and  this
mechanism, this two-stage drying is based on the heating medium, heating medium.
Pre-concentrating  liquid  foods  the  highest  solids  content  possible  using  multiple  effect
evaporator. So instead of removing high amount of moisture in the dryer. So it can be
removed previously by or pre-concentrating by evaporation and after the drying for final
moisture removal. Because the energy per unit mass of water removed in evaporators can be
several orders magnitude less than the time required for dehydration. And also automatic
control of air humidity by computer-control. This also improve the energy efficiency of the
hot air dryers.
(Refer Slide Time: 45:28)  
Then bin dryers as I told earlier, so this is nothing but a small storage dryers, right. So it is
batch bin dryer is used to force relatively large quantities of air through the shallow grain
depth, so that to obtain rapid drying speed. So that means, so it is bin so through which the air
is, hot air is passed through, here you have a food material, so your exhaust air goes. So
taking the moisture away. Okay, mostly storage bins right. So these are storage bins through
which the hot air or normal air at particular temperature is circulated.
So here the bin dryers are large, cylindrical, rectangular containers fitted with the mesh base.
And hot air passes up through a bed of food and relatively low velocities. Example 0.5 metre
per second, per metre square of bin area. So, very low velocity air is passing through. Theyhave a high capacity and low capital and running cost. Because it can be used as a storage
vessel as well are mainly used for finishing to about 3 to 6 percentage moisture content. After
initial drying in another type of dryers.
This is not a main dryer. So after drying it can be used for storage as well as the drying right.
Because the air at particular temperature is passed through these food material. It removes
about 3 to 6 percentage of moisture content.
(Refer Slide Time: 47:00)  
To improve the operating capacity of initial dryers by removing the food when it is falling
rate period, when moisture removal is most time consuming. So they improve the operating
capacity of initial dryers by removing the food when it is in the falling rate period, whenmoisture removal is most time consuming. So we said here it can be a final drying equipment
right. 
The initial drying is done by any other drying equipment, where we take this as I told earlier
this is the moisture removal from the interior of the food material right. So it is a time-
consuming process. So instead of doing it in initial  dryer, so certain 3 to 6 percentage
moisture removal can be done in bin dryer as well. While storing it we can also remove some
of the moisture in the falling rate period. That means inside a food material, surface moisture
can be removed from the initial dryer as well.
The deep bed of food permits variations in moisture content to be equalised, act as a store to
smooth out fluctuations in the product flow between drying and packaging operations. The
deep bed of food permits variations in moisture content to be equalised and acts as a store to
smooth out fluctuations in the product flow between drying and packaging operations. So
between drying and packaging operation, so the bin dryer is used. 
So that means if there is any variations in the moisture content that will be taken care in the
bin dryer. Because it acts as a intermediate storage as well as drying equipment between the
drying and packaging operation. The dryers may be several meters high and it is therefore
important that foods sufficiently strong to withstand the compression and thus retains spaces
between the pieces to permit the passage of hot air through the bed. 
So this is as I told earlier this also can be as a intermediate storage. So intermediate storage
will be large storage area right. So the height of the bin dryers is very much high and the food
material are stored in high quantities. So in that case, it should withstand the compression.
Because when you are keeping large amount of food material in the bin dryer, so the food
material should withstand the compression. As well as there should be a space between the
food material for the air to pass through. Otherwise, the drying will not be done equally.
Okay, so this is about bin dryers, our first dryers what we are discussing today in the food
processing industries.(Refer Slide Time: 49:46)  
The second one is spray dryer. So the bin dryers mostly used for solid food material, but
spray dryers are used for drying liquids and some of the slurries. The feed is converted into a
fine mist or a spray which is then mixed with the heated air. So here we use a atomiser,
atomiser or maybe pressure nozzle as well. Okay, so it is sprays right, the liquid food particle
is sprayed and mixed with the hot air. Very rapid drying takes place, converting the liquid
droplets into powder particles. So what you get is fine dried powder. 
The small size of particles, the size of the particles used to here is 10 to 200 micrometre. So
that is the way the surface area of each particle is increased because if you have a large food
chunk, then you are hot air to be passed in the less surface area. But when you reduce the
food chunks into the small, small particles size, so that means the 10 to 200 micrometre.
So large surface area is available for the hot air to pass through right. So in that way the
drying is very quick right. Instead of drying a large particle, the small particle, the surface
area is increase. So that is why the hot air is available for drying very quickly right. So also
the distance that moisture has to migrate within the particle to the drying surface is also
relatively small. 
So think of a food material from here this point to this point, the moisture has to migrate. So
if I have a very small particle, so this height also reduced in that way also you will have less
drying time, which is about 1 to 20 second.(Refer Slide Time: 51:42)  
So there is also significant evaporative cooling effect, so that surface temperature of the
droplets does not rise much above the wet bulb temperature of the drying air until drying
nears the completion. So total drying takes place in the temperature less than the wet bulb
temperature of the drying air. Because the particles are the droplets does not increase the
temperature right.
Due to the evaporative cooling effect the droplets temperature does not rise, which always
reminds less than the wet bulb temperature of the drying air. And provided the particles, once
dry, are swiftly removed from the drying chamber, heat damaged the product can be limited.
So  that  is  also  another  advantageous  spray  dryer. One  advantage  is  due  to  significant
evaporative cooling effect, your droplet temperature does not rise and it always less than the
wet bulb temperature of the drying air throughout the drying period.
That second advantage is the products are swiftly removed from the drying chamber, so that
the heat damage to the product is very limited. So for example, this is your drying chamber.
Okay, so here you get the air filtered remember, this is the food processing application. So we
need to take care about the air quality as well. So then with using fan and heater your hot air
is given to the drying chamber. 
So from here you have a liquid product tank, so from there your liquid food particle is
pumped and it is sent to the food chamber, here we use atomiser to spray the food particle. So
this is mixed with the dry air, so your product is taken, maybe we can use here the rot orrotary valve. So the fine powders goes to the storage and distribution line, storage and
distribution. So here it is a fine powders. Okay.
So then air is further sent to the cyclone separator, cyclone separator. Because the air also has
some of the powdered product, so exhaust air leaves. So then fine powder is further feed in to
the final product or sometimes what happens. It may also goes back to the, it may also go
back to the drying chamber for as a recycle product.
(Refer Slide Time: 54:59)  
So the next one is rotary drum dryers. So, which consist of a rotating drum 2 to 3 metre in
diameter and 15 to 20 metre long right. The dryer is slightly inclined towards the outlet. So it
is something of this kind, this is a hollow cylindrical drum. So this is the air exhaust, this is
feed in. So you have various provisions here, so here the one is drive gear, then supporting
rollers, the third one is discharge screw conveyor.
So your air enters here, so here we have a heating element which heats the air and your solid
is coming from the inlet in this way, solid, it is a counter current flow. Okay, so that is the
way solid gets dried. So these slanting will helps for easy handling of solids from the inlet to
outlet. So here you will get dried solids. 
So the drum also have flights used to for lifting the substance, when the drum is rotating, so
this here you have a flights. So, which helps in right, so this is in the wheel, so this is a side
view. So this flights are used for lifting the substances. And the air temperature usually 120 to175 and velocity ranges from 2000 to 25,000 kg per metre squared hour. So this is nothing
but mass velocity. Okay, so this is about the rotary drum dryers.
(Refer Slide Time: 57:38)
So the next one is fluidized bed dryers, so normally fluidized bed dryer will have a. So this is
your air in that means hot air, so you have a perforated plates in which your food particles
were kept okay, so this is your exhaust, so this is attached to the cyclone separator from
which your exhaust air is coming out. 
So your dried solids, you will collect here. So what happens is here if you draw a graph
between  velocity  versus  dell  P. So this  is  linear  line.  So once  it  reaches  the  minimum
fluidization velocity, minimum fluidization velocity. So this solid particle starts fluidizingalong with the air, so this is the second condition, when your minimum fluidization velocity
of the particle is reached then it starts fluidizing along with the flowing air current.
So then it goes to cyclone separator where you are air and dried solid were separated. That is
the you get the dried solids. So here you will find some depth in the pressure drop due to
fluidization of the food material. So then it forms the linear line right. So, and one more thing
is also here you need to take care is for example here the drying wet granular solids which do
not tend to stick or agglomerate. The thing you need to take care is it has to be used for wet
granular solids which do not stick or agglomerate. So that kind of food solids only you can
use this fluidized to bed dryer.
And incipient fluidization is the point at which the fluidization starts. At this stage the solids
are loosened, and they will not contact each other. So they gets loosened and start fluidization
along with the air stream. At this stage where minimum fluidization velocity is surpassed, the
pressure drop slightly falls, because it starts fluidizing. And the residence time of the material
in the dryer is 30 to 120 seconds for removing surface moisture. That means in constant rate
period and 15 to 30 minute for removing moisture from internal diffusion. That is for falling
rate period. So this is the mechanism with which your fluidize bed dryer is working.
(Refer Slide Time: 60:42)  
And the next one is tray dryers. So these consist of an insulated cabinet fitted with shallow
mash or perforated trays, each of which contains a thin layer of food. So, which is about 2 to
6 centimetre deep right. So one cabinet is there in which a lot of trays, perforated trays in
which  the  food  material  is  kept.  So  the  thickness  of  the  food  material  here  is  2  to  6
centimetre.
Hot air is blown with the velocity of 0.5 to 5 meter per second through a system of ducts and
baffles to promote uniform air distribution over and or through each tray. So baffles will
swing take care of the uniformity in the heating. Additional heaters may be placed above or
alongside of the trays to increase the rate of drying okay. So in the tray dryers, you will have
a cabinet, so this is your door. So you have a trays over here. Okay, so here is where your
food material is kept which is of 2 to 6 centimetre deep.
So here you have a air inlet. Okay, so you have got a fan here, so from the fan it goes to
heater, the heated air passed through each of the tray. So here your food materials are kept
okay, so after passing through, so this air exhaust through this. So after once the drying
operation is over. These trays are taken out with the dried solid okay. So what we wanted to
tell here is system of ducts or baffles to promote uniform air distribution over and or through
each tray.
Because here, there is no guiding rot, so if we keep baffles or guiding rots. So it will help the
air passed through each tray more economically. Okay, so the dryers are used for small scale
production, which is of 1 to 20 tons per day or for pilot scale work. So they have a low capital
and maintenance cost under flexible in operation for different foods. Because what I need is one cabinet and some trays and one fan and heater. So it is the capital
cost is very much low and maintenance cost as well because we can take the tray out and
cleaning is a very much easy.
And however, they have relatively poor control and produce more variable product quality as
food dries more rapidly on the trays nearest to the heat source. So this problem is there right,
so that is where here we took additional heat is may be placed above or alongside of the trays
to increase the rate of drying. So here the mechanism is, here your heater stays right. So the
air, which comes here will be so hot, so the tray next to the heater will get dried too quickly.
And further drying damage the food material right. And also, there may be a mechanism,
these kind of heaters can be kept near each tray and the flowrate of air will take care of the
temperature and the drying of the food material. So that is what here it is said, there is a poor
control and which produces more variable product quality. The tray which is near to the heat
source will get dry fast and the tray which is away from the heat source will take time to get it
dried. And so you will get the variable product quality.
At  low  cost,  semi-continuous  mechanism  which  overcomes  this  problem  by  radically
replacing the lowest tray in the stack has been developed. Actually, the semi-continuous
mechanism means, so there is a control mechanism which keeps changing the tray first tray to
last,  then  this  one  to  first  like  this  right.  At  intermediate  time,  at  intermittent  time,  at
intermittent interval. There is semi-continuous mechanism which keeps changing the tray so
that way we can optimize the drying time among the trays and get the good product quality.
(Refer Slide Time: 65:22)  
The next one is belt dryers. So these are continuous conveyor dryers are up to 20 m long and
3 m wide. Food is dried on a mesh belt in beds of 5 to 15centimetredeep. So belt dryers have
the conveyor belt. Okay, so this goes like this, so your product is feed in. So your dried solids
will be out from here. So here something of this kind because you need place to air to get in.
So here you have a heater and air comes from the, filtered air comes from here, so this gets
heated and here is your food material. So it pass through the food material and it goes out,
exhaust air.
So here you have a guiding rods to guide clear along the exhaust. So this conveyor belt will
be conveying the solids from the inlet to outlet. So this is simple belt dryer and there are
varieties in each cabinet, there may be a for example, the total cabinet will be there. So here
you have many such belts right. The feed in comes from here and goes in the second belt andcomes here and goes in the second belt. So this will be done in many belts right. So that kind
of design also available.
So this is another belt where solids will be coming and for the air side. So air will be passed
through every belt right, what you have seen here in the tray dryers. So the same kind of
mechanisms, so you can also observe in the belt dryers. So instead of trays your products will
be conveyed through a belt conveyor. So that is a difference between tray dryers and belt
dryers. So continuous conveyor dryers are up to 20 meter long and 3 meter wide. Food is
dried on a mesh belt in beds 5 to 15 centimetre deep.
The airflow is initially directed upwards through the bed of food and then downwards in the
later stages to prevent right food from blowing out of the bed. So that means the airflow as I
said here, so there would be a guiding rods, which takes care of the airflow. So above and
below the drying solids, the food to be dried.
And two or three stage dryers mix and repile the partly dried food into the deeper beds. So,
which is of 15 to 25centimetreand then to 50 to 900centimetrein three stage dryers. So that is
what I told here, so instead of one particular conveyor belt in which the food materials are
passing. So we will have set of three stages or two stages based on the requirement. So this
improves the uniformity of the drying and saves the floor space. And foods are dried to 10 to
15 percentage moisture content and then finished in bin dryers right.
So 10 to 15 percentage moisture content is done in belt conveyors. Then the food material is
passed to the bin dryer for final moisture removal. So this equipment has good control over
drying conditions and high production rates. It is used for large scale drying of foods. For
example,  5.5  tons  per  hour  belt  dryers.  The  dryers  may  have  a  computer-controlled
independent drying zones and automatic loading and unloading to reduce the labour cost
right.
In the belt dryer two things we need to see, one is it can be done as a single stage or multiple
stage, multiple stage handles high production rates. Moisture content of about 10 to 15
percentage is removed and the solids are further feed in to bin dryers for further moisture
removal and the capacity this belt dryers handles is 5.5 tons per hour. 
And also the airflow is initially directed upwards through the bed of food upwards and then
downwards in later stages to prevent dried food from blowing out of the bed right. So itshould not move from the conveyor belt. So that mechanism is taken care by the guiding
rods.
(Refer Slide Time: 70:30)  
Okay, so here the advantages and limitations of different flow configurations. So it can be
done in co-current, counter current, centre exhaust and crossflow type. So, if food as well as
air flow is in same parallel or co-current mode, one thing is the low moisture content difficult
to achieve as cold moist air passes over the dry food. So that means, so your food is at high
moisture level and your air is here from hot air is passing through right.
So hot air sees the high moisture content food right. So then, along with the length, the
moisture content of the air increases right. So low moisture content in the food is difficult to
achieve because the cold moist air is in contact with the food material at the later stages of the
drying. So this limitation in parallel are co-current flow is taken care here because the counter
current type your high moisture food in the end is seen by the hot air right. So here the low
final moisture content as hot air passes over dry food right.
So the dry food sees the hot air, so that limitation in the co-current flow is taken care in the
counter current flow. Otherwise the advantage of co-current flow is little shrinkage or low
bulk density or little damage to food. No risk of spoilage. So this risk of spoilage in terms of
heat right because the high moisture content food is seen by the hot air right. So in that case,
the thermal damage can be avoided. So whatever advantages here in the co-current flow that
is the disadvantage for counter current flow.And centre exhaust type is nothing but whatever the exhaust air that is recirculated back to
the dryer. So the combined benefits of parallel as well as counter current driers, but less than
the crossflow driers. Because one will be in the co-current flow, other will be in the counter
current flow. So here more complex and expensive than the single direction air flow.
In the crossflow type the food and air flow is perpendicular to each other. The flexible control
of drying conditions by separately controlled heating zones, giving uniform drying and high
drying rates in crossflow and more complex and expensive to buy and operate and maintain.
That is limitations.
(Refer Slide Time: 73:09)  
So here are various types of driers were given and their mode of operation, whether it is good
for solid or liquid food or how much initial moisture content, it can handle and whether that
particular dryer is useful for heat sensitive materials and size of the food particle, whether it
should be a small or intermediate or granules or pellets or pieces. 
And whether it can be mechanically strong or not, drying rate is low, moderate or fast. And
what is a final moisture content and typical maximum evaporative capacity of each dryer and
their examples of the products, everything given in the one table. So this is taken from the
references what I am going to give you. 
So the bin dryer we have seen, cabinet we have seen, cabinet dryer, conveyor and belt dryer
we have seen and rotary drum dryer we have seen and fluidized bed dryer we have discussed
and after that spray dryer we have discussed. And there are a lot of dryers which are used forthe food industry. So I request you to refer the material or reference material given in the
lecture for further various driers applied in the food industry.
(Refer Slide Time: 74:24)  
And this is latest to technique used for drying of solids because if you see whatever the driers
we have discussed. So all are based on hot air driers and I also discussed about how to
increase the efficiency of the normal hot air driers, what are all the measures to be taken care?
But nowadays microwave or dielectric heating drying is used. 
And  microwave  augmented  freeze  drying  is  used.  That  means  the  microwave  is  used,
electromagnetic sources used to dry the food product. And centrifugal fluidised bed drying.
So there centrifugal forces used and ball drying, ultrasonic waves are used for drying. So
their applications, advantages and limitations are given, so you may refer.(Refer Slide Time: 75:12)  
So this is the for the references and additional resources which I have used in this particular
lecture. And also, this is limited lecture on various type of driers used for the food industry.
So I request you to further refer these material to get to know further various types of driers
used in food industry. Thank you.