Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Lecture No. 26
Types of Functional Foods: Probiotic and Nutraceuticals
(Refer Slide Time: 00:52)
Good morning everybody, so last class we have seen about the biosensors. So today’s class
we are going to discuss about the types of functional foods so in that probiotic as well as
nutraceuticals. So we know the food is nothing but a basic requirement of any human life and
that food contains many nutrients so that are very much important for proper functioning as
well as nourishment of the body and if you see nowadays there are many diseases so which
stressing various body organs from liver to kidney and sometimes it go to the mutations into
cancer cells as well. So and other side if you see the treatment becomes very expensive so
that is where to compensate this between the diseases and how to treat them naturally, so that
is where this particular notion is coined where let food be the medicine and medicine be the
food.
So if you see in the ancient history the mostly Indians and Chinese where almost stick to this
particular notion. So they were taking food as almost with the all therapeutic values and also
the same thing was there for Athens and Comedian as well, so infact the context whatever we
are going to talk about today which is nothing but an nutraceuticals, so this particular market
if you see the genesis of this nutraceuticals markets it is from Japan. So it is in early 1980 it is
started picked up so from there every country started thinking about how the nutrients andpharmaceuticals can be combine together and how the medicine can be natural instead of
chemically synthesis.
So, that is where this particular name is coined which is nothing but a nutraceutical, so
nutraceuticals are range of natural products that serves the purpose of food and medicine
together, though emerging from a traditional background as I said earlier nutraceuticals are
the future of the food industry and serve as an inspiration for health and novel for products
healthy and novel food products and some foods offer health benefits related to prevention
and treatment of various diseases. So, this is nothing but prevention itself as well as after the
diseases come then the treatment purpose as well many food varieties are used and modern
food science redefines food, earlier the food is defined as the product used as a fuel for body
to provide energy with nutritional value in terms of its composition. 
So, food generally contains the composition of carbohydrates, fats, vitamins, proteins and
minerals, so this is the earlier the definition, definition is nothing but a its nothing but a food
is nothing but a fuel for body to provide energy and nutritional value by its composition as
well but that is changed from not only fuel for the body sometimes it is also used as a
therapeutic agents. The medicinal benefits of foods attract high interest of customers for
wellbeing using essential nutrients for prevention and treatment of diseases, so more than
normal food the foods with particular essential nutrition, so that got attracted in the food
market by the consumers.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:31)
The currently due to extensive research on health foods, scientific evidences illuminate how
diet is connected to disease and how food can be effectively used to manage diseases, so that
is where the current research trend. So, you may be thinking about why in the thermal
processing of food we need to talk about the nutraceuticals and infact last class we discuss
about the food biosensors but as I said earlier during the thermal processing due to high
temperature most of the nutrient quality we lose, in one of the lectures we also discuss that
can be added later maybe mostly the volatile components are the essential nutrients and
sometimes the flavoring agents can be added after the processing.
So that is where we are here to discuss about what are all the nutraceuticals in such cases not
only the nutrient quality if I can add something extra which is also having therapeutic agents
that would be extra benefit for me. So that is where we are discussing about the all the
functional  foods  and  what  are all  the  components  present in  the functional  and dietary
supplements and their related therapeutic values we are going to discuss.
So, the current research trend is how diet is connected to disease as well as how food can be
effectively used to manage the diseases, so the nutraceutical came from the word nutrition as
well as pharmaceuticals this is first coined by Stephen L. DeFelice in 1989 founder and
chairman of the Foundation of Innovation Medicine. The nutraceuticals are food products of
natural origin owing health benefits like the improvement of physiological performance and
also  effective  on  various  diseases,  nutraceutical  includes  the  products  derived  from  the
isolated  nutrients,  dietary  supplements,  genetically  engineered  designer  foods,  herbal
products,  processed  foods  and  beverages  everything  comes  under  the  category  of
nutraceuticals.(Refer Slide Time: 06:50)
Among them vitamin enriched, vitamin enriched health promoting products and also fresh
foods like vegetables, fruits and fermented foods populated with live cultures, so this we call
it as probiotics, so these are friendly bacterias so among this verity of products derived from
isolated nutrients, dietary  supplements  and genetically engineered designer foods, herbal
products and processed foods. The vitamin enriched health promoting products and also the
fresh foods like vegetables, fruits and fermented foods populated with live cultures, probiotic
so this is enriched by live cultures can be considered to be the functional foods with probiotic
benefits, so this is what we told probiotic benefits so these are friendly bacterias which helps
in many metabolic processes in the human body, friendly bacteria.
So,  the  nutraceutical  provides  a  proactive  healthcare  approach  with  the  tremendous
therapeutic impacts on human body and they are also a leading trend in healthcare medicine
in the market and connected to food science with pharmaceuticals dosage forms hosting food
bioactive compounds as a active principle in formulations, so nutraceuticals is not only the
food science department, it also includes the pharmaceutical dosage forms, dosage forms in
the sense either in terms of pills, powders, capsules and parenterals, parenterals are nothing
but the invitro, invitro is nothing but a injection form. 
So, nutraceuticals are connected to food science with a pharmaceuticals dosage forms in the
pharmaceutical dosage forms in the sense this pills, powders, capsules and parenterals which
are containing bioactive compounds as a active principle formulation, so normally in pills for
example normal diseases if you take pill so that contains particular chemical so which treats
as a for example antibody, so that particular pill has a chemical that treats  a particulardiseases but here in this pills that nutraceuticals pills you will have a bioactive components as
a active formulation.
These bioactive constituents are phytochemicals and are known to sustain or promote health,
so phytochemicals are nothing but a chemicals derived from plants, so these chemicals are
available in the plants as a growth promoter, so or it sometimes also function as a defense
system, it protects the plants from insects and all, so these bioactive components which are
used as a dosage form, so these bioactive constituents are phytochemicals and are known to
sustain and or promote health.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:24) 
So,  the  nutraceutical  industry  exploited  a  broad  class  of  phytochemical,  so  mostly  the
nutraceutical components are bioactive components which are derived from the plants, so
they are nothing but a phytochemicals. So what are all they phytoestrogens, terpenoids,
limonoids, glucosesinolates, phytosterol, polyphenols, carotenoids, flavonoids, isoflavonoids,
and anthoeyanidins. So, with the specific pharmacological effects on human health so those
where anti-inflammatory, antioxidants, anti-inflammatory you know which is against the
inflammation action of the body and antioxidants which reduces the oxidation which further
produces the reactive oxygen species, so these antioxidants stops the or prevent the oxidation
reaction so in order to stop the reactive oxygen species protection. 
Antibacterial  you  know  against  the  bacteria  anti-allergic  and  anti-fungal  and  anti-
hyperlipidemic, so that means hypo cholesterol, so anti hyperlipidemic agent means so that
reduces  the  cholesterol  then  chemopreventive  so  can  against  the  cancer,  thenhepatoprotective, so that is against the liver diseases and neuro protective against the neutral
system diseases hypotensive, so hypotensive against the hypotensive so these phytochemical
acts as a anti-hypertensive, so that means so to reduce the hyper tension this can be used and
anti-aging, diabetes and osteoporosis so this is nothing but a brittle bones and carminative.
Carminative is nothing but anti-flatulence, so that means the air built up in the JI track so this
can acts against that and anti-spasmodic the anti-spasmodic in the sense to relive the spasm,
so that is nothing but a involuntary muscle contraction, so anti-spasmodic in the sense it
reduces the muscle contraction, then it also acts as against the heart diseases and induces
apoptosis, so apoptosis is means apoptosis means it is nothing but a death of cells during
growth development. So, apoptosis means death of cells during growth development so these
phytochemicals induces that so for as a growth promoter and it acts as against the DNA
damage and cancer and diuretic so this can be given as a water pills and CNS stimulants CNS
is  central  nervous  system  and  analgesic  agents  and  immunomodulator,  so  your
phytochemicals can act in therapeutic values in many of this categories.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:55)
So maybe we can quickly see about, so what are these phytochemicals the first one what we
told is phytoestrogen so the name itself you can see here so this is analogous to or equivalent
to estrogen so this is found in fruits, veggies, then legumes and grains so major food varieties
are apple and grape, so veggies part beans, garlic, onion, garlic and onion. So then next one is
terpenoids so these are kinds of scent smells you will get what you get, so this you can find it
from Eucalyptus, Eucalyptus tree and in our kitchen you can find it in cinnamon, cloves,
ginger etcetera. So when these are added into protein, when these are added into protein for
attachment to cell membrane.
So, the next one is Limonoids. So from the name itself you can say so this mostly available in
citrus fruits and the next one is glucosinoculate so these are sulphur containing components,
sulphur containing compounds, so which are present in cabbage, broccoli, then brussels,
sprouts etcetera, actually it is that pungent smell so what do you get that is when you are
chewing, so it releases the mustard oil so that is where we sometimes feel little bitter as well.
And next one is phytosterol so this  is present in this cell  membrane, so sterol so it is
equivalent to cholesterol and also there are scientific evidences so that it reduces the LDL
content in the human body.
So LDL is nothing but a bad cholesterol we say so it reduces when it is taken at a particular
dosage. So, the next one is polyphenols, so polyphenols are present in fruits, veggies, cereals
and dry legumes and also these are very important chemical very important phyto chemical
and some of the polyphenols also got this GRAS tag by U.S.A so this GRAS is in the sense
generally regarded as safe and also it is also found in chocolates what we eat, chocolates. So,
the next one is carotenoids, carotene you already know because these are pigments so yellow,orange and red fat, red fat soluble pigments and also it is converted by body as a vitamin A so
that is what carrot what you take so that is that is having carotenoids. So which is of yellow
pigment and the next one is flavonoids. So they are secondary metabolites of plant and
fungus, so they are present in tea, grapes and apple etcetera. So then isoflavonoids is comes
under  the  category  of  flavonoids  then  Anthocyanidines,  Anthocyanidines  so  these  are
pigments that give red, purple and blue colour, so they are pigments which gives red, purple
and blue. So that is all about that quick review about these phytochemicals so these are
having all these affects.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:53)
So, nutraceuticals holding a promising future for public health because after seeing that we
must be knowing how important these nutraceuticals are, so although nutraceuticals are not anew product nowadays, confusion still exist between foods with health claims and dietary
supplements. For example, here I have told you, so the phytosterol helps in reducing the LDL
content, so there are scientific evidence but that cannot be taken as for granted so normally it
should be tested on human body properly then those reports we would always depend on to
make any claim that this particular phytochemical is having this particular therapeutic effect
on human body. 
So that one has to be very much careful and whatever we discuss here also it is taken from
the particular references and in that reference book if you go and see there are search articles
in against the every claim, so in this particular lecture I specially request you to check these
facts from the research articles because any clime make here should have proper scientific
evidence. We also know from ancient history so certain natural plants and the product were
used for therapeutic values but since science also grown up to a particular level so we would
be able to check those facts those sayings what we were told by scientific evidences, so that I
want you to be bit careful about. So that is where here it is told so the confusions still exist
between the foods with health claims and dietary supplements and the nutraceutical can be
used as a dietary supplement and as a functional food so these are all major category as per it
function and health benefits they are classified based on the function, based on source, based
on the bioactive components.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:07)
So based on the function they are classified as a dietary substances and functional foods
based on bioactive components so whatever we have seen the protein peptides, carbohydrates
and fibers, lipids and fatty acids, catechins, lycopene, vitamins and based on their sourcefrom plant, so from plant we have seen many phytochemicals and from animal origin also, I
would like to highlight few may be calcium, zinc these are there in the milk itself and
selenium, minerals and these two EPA and DHA these are omega 3 fatty acids mostly in the
fish. 
So they are Eicospentaenoic acid and  Docosahexaenoic acid so the EPA DHA  and from
microbial origin one is from  Saccharomyces  boulardii and  Bifidobacterium bifidum  and
Lactobacillus acidophilus this is very famous and Streptococcus salivarius, so these are form
microbial origin animal origin we already know from fish from cow and plants are most of
them are phytochemicals that we have seen earlier bit elaborate also. So in this lecture we are
going to only concentrate on based on the function and based on the bioactive components
and based on their source in between we will see for example these two omega 3 fatty acids
we are going to see in a way in the class of fatty acids and for phytochemicals I have already
discusses here, so we are going to discuss in detail about the classification based on function
and classification based on bioactive components.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:58)
The first one is Dietary supplements based on function so these are nutrients found and food
products and processed in suitable dosage forms depending on their mode of administration
either it can be a pills, powders and the parenterals and capsules as well, and from the dietary
supplement health and education act which is nothing but DSHEA in 1994 in U.S.A, so they
told that the dietary supplements are the products compressed of dietary constituents and
orally administered to supplement that nutritional requirement of the diet.So, dietary supplements are defined as the products compressed of dietary constituents, so
they are orally administered to supplement the nutritional requirement of the diet. So what are
all those dietary constituents so they refer to bioactive components compressing of amino
acids, vitamins, minerals, important metabolites and certain enzymes.
One example would be vitamin E injection what we are taking, so that is what they said us so
they  are  the  dietary  constituents  and  orally  administered  to  supplement  the  nutritional
requirement of the diet. Dietary supplements also include herbs or extracts available in tablets
capsules, powders, liquids and any other dosage form that I have already discussed besides
fulfilling the nutritional requirement dietary supplements also participated in therapies related
to various or variety of ailments.
So, not only nutrition requirement so they also take part in the therapies related to variety of
elements, so if your vitamin D is reduced you may be having a bone related issues, so if you
are diet is complemented with the proper level or proper dosage level of vitamin E then it
side effect is you will not have any bone related issues. So that is the way it is told as it is not
only fulfilling the nutritional requirement it is also participated in therapies related to variety
of elements. National health organization created the standard for a balanced diet to avoid the
malnutrition chances and minimize the risk related with some severe diseases, so it is the
standard or created by national health organization NHO.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:51) 
Even  cereals  and  grinds  have  high  in  calcium  serve  as  a  supplementary  nutraceuticals,
currently  nutrigrain  food  and  bars  are  among  the  popular  products  sold  as  a  dietarysupplements even big brands offer multigrain food products in the market instead of one
particular meet only so they also combine 2 or 3 products, for example rice, wheat and your
corn and ground nut, peanut so everything together so that is given as a multigrain food
products. And a diet rich in ketogenic bodies is also reported to control diseases like seizures
so this is nothing but kind of electric shock in the brain, so if you take ketogenic groups in the
food so they can control the diseases like seizures but if the diet is rich in fat and low in
protein and carbohydrates they normally aggravated the diseases.
So for example, if we give the dietary supplements as a ketogenic groups then it is reported
that it controls the diseases like seizures but at the same time if the food is rich in fat and low
in protein and carbohydrates so that normally aggravate the diseases like seizures it is not like
even  though  we  said  vitamins,  fats,  protein,  carbohydrates  everything  or  functional
components of the food, so certain components may be able to control diseases and certain
components of the food may aggravate the particular diseases.
So, it has to be a diet or food has to be taken in proper dosage based on the diseases or based
on the dosage form, so which particular component of the food should be high for which
therapeutic value so that has to be determine with the scientific evidences and dietary agents
also  combat  the obesity issues  and confront the insulin  resistance.  So this  is  regarding
diabetes and fibrous foods like whole grains reduce coronary heart diseases which is nothing
but CHD risk and also manage type 2 diabetes mellitus, whole grains fibrous foods so they
are reported to reduce the CHD coronary heart diseases and also they can manage type 2
diabetes mellitus.(Refer Slide Time: 30:46) 
It was also emphasized from the results obtained from the metabolic experiments done the
intake of whole grains improves lipid profiles and controls type 2 diabetes in comparison to
refined grains. So instead of refined grains if the whole grain is taken so that can control the
type  2  diabetes.  And  soy  bread  had  become  a  preferred  option  of  nutririch  food  with
phytoestrogen,  so  already  we  told  phytoestrogen  is  nothing  but  a  similar  to  estragon
component, so this supplements of these phytoestrogen can argument the level of estrogen
and the bode thus it  offers  a natural way to restore hormonal balance  and also chemo
preventive action against the breast cancer. So this is equivalent to estrogen hormone which
is present in the female. So, soy bread had become a preferred option of nutririch food with a
phytoestrogen, even edible mushrooms are highly rich in polyphenols with antioxidant, lipid
lowering, immunomodulatory and anticancer effects, so what are all they edible mushrooms.(Refer Slide Time: 32:11)
Further,  both  chondroitin  sulfates  as  well  as  glucosamine  sulfate  are  also  effective  in
osteoarthritis- related symptoms, so this I have already told bone related issue bones becomes
a bones become brittle, so the phytochemicals chondroitin sulfate as well as glucosamine
sulfate so they act against the osteoarthritis. Another popular functional food is buckwheat
protein so this is nothing but a seeds of starchy material  with the therapeutic  effect of
lowering cholesterol reliving anti-hypertension and offering laxative effect with its abundant
fiber content.
So this is against the (cosnti) constipation issues, so the buckwheat protein has a therapeutic
effect of lowering cholesterol and reliving anti-hypertension and offering a laxative effect
with its abundant fiber, so this is reliving tension and it is like a anti-hypertension pill, so it
relieves the hyper-tension so this is nothing but a anti-hypertension agent, which is nothing
but the buckwheat protein.
So, the buckwheat protein with the therapeutic effect of lowering cholesterol and reliving
anti-hypertension and offering a laxative effect with its abundant fiber content, so this is rich
fiber so which helps in all this therapeutic value. Dairy products are also developed as a
promising health-stimulating nutraceuticals, so that we already know so milk is one of the
example, among them popular products contain probiotic bacteria that enhance gut health, so
this we already know so we have friendly bacterias in our guts.(Refer Slide Time: 34:27)
So,  one  such  product  is  a  bio-yoghurt,  so  this  is  introduced  in  Japan  which  contains
Bifidobacteria as well as Lactobacillus acidophilus so these are probiotics and Yakult yoghurt
so which provides Lactobacillus casei shirota and some other fermented products such as
those offered by Culturella so which provides Lactobacillus GG and along with Nestlé’s LC1
so which provides Lactobacillus Johnsonii so this is a drink, so this comes in capsules form
so these are all probiotic supplements.
So,  the  Yakult  yoghurt  provides  lactobacillus  as  casei  shirota  and  culturella  provides
lactobacillus GG and Nestlé’s LC1 provides lactobacillus johnsonii and bio-yoghurt you will
have a  Bifidobacteria as well as Lactobacillus acidophilus, health drinks are exponentially
increased in popularity as nutraceuticals and all these potentials sources of nutraceuticals are
rationally accepted throughout the health market and are also functionalized as an adjuvant
therapy in conjunction  with conventional therapies. So remember  as I told earlier  these
nutraceuticals are accepted in the health market and they are functionalised as an adjuvant
therapy but not a main therapy so they should be conjucted with the conventional therapies.(Refer Slide Time: 36:08)
Though  dietary  supplements  do  not  need  any  regulatory  requirements  it  should  be
manufactured in companies with high-quality manufacturing facilities approved by US-FDA
that food and drug administration or any other authority depending upon the country, so for
example if you take Europe so it is nothing but a European Food Safety Authorities so we
call it as EUFSA and Health Canada we have seen one of the definition from Health Canada
and for US it is FDA so it is based on country so this is from Canada, so this is USA. So,
based on the country so they should be manufactured in the companies with high-quality
manufacturing facilities the dietary supplements are actually preordained for maintenance of
regular body functions may not make claims for treatment of disease or elements.
So this is very much important this is what I told as a claim. So, these dietary supplements are
actually preordained for maintenance of regular body functions and may not make claims for
treatment of any diseases, so this is very much important point. So we cannot use them
directly that as a treatment for diseases but it can be used as a adjuvant therapy in conjunction
with the conventional therapies and also any such claims of that treat this particular diseases
should come with the scientific evidences with properly tested in the human body.(Refer Slide Time: 38:11)
And functional foods so they are the foods derived from natural origin enriched in nutrients
and functional foods are processed to complement the food with essential nutrients with the
nitrification process and functional foods are defined by Health Canada as I said regular food
with some components having specific therapeutic effect along with rich nutritional value to
meet daily nutritional requirement. Functionalized foods are the foods with some components
having specific therapeutic effect along with rich nutritional value to meet daily nutritional
requirement. 
(Refer Slide Time: 38:54)
So, in from Japan functional foods so they have a 3 important standards for functional foods,
1 is they must be derived from natural sources and consumed in their native state instead ofprocessed in different dosage forms like tablet, capsule and powder they should be natural
and instead of processed in different dosage forms such as tablets, capsules or powder and
consumed regularly as a part of daily diet and exert a dual role in prevention and management
of disease as well as contribute in biological processes. So these 3 standards came from Japan
functional foods so in defining the functional foods. So, herbs have always been known and
used as food and medicine and they are readily used as a remedies for acute and chronic
diseases, and medicinal herbs have many active components responsible for their biological
effects. 
(Refer Slide Time: 39:58)
So, medicinal herbs here we are going to see this particular table I have taken from the
references which is given at the end of the slide, so you can refer them. so I would like to
mention one or two, one is Aloe Vera gel so which has the dilates capillaries and anti-
inflammatory agents and emollient so emollient is nothing but a giving proper soothing affect
and wound healing properties and if you say garlic, so they are anti-bacterial, anti-fungal and
anti-thrombotic  and  hypotensive  and  febrinolytic  and  anti-hyperlipidemic  and  anti-
inflammatory. The ginger will be used in therapeutic values of carminative treatment of
dizziness and positive inotropic etcetera, so this particular table is available in the reference
given so you may refer later.(Refer Slide Time: 40:55) 
And here the bioactive components  based on bioactive components we can classify the
nutraceuticals  as  isoprenoids,  phenolics,  protein  and  amino  acids,  carbohydrates  and  its
derivatives lipids and fatty acids, minerals and microbials so in the microbials you probiotic
and prebiotic would come and fatty acids you know already I have discussed omega 3 and
minerals, calcium, selenium, potassium, zinc and copper. And proteins are nothing but amino
acids, phenolics we have already seen that flavonones, flavonols etcetera and isoprenoids are
nothing but a carotenoids so that we are going to see separately.
(Refer Slide Time: 41:43)
Probiotics  and  Prebiotics,  so  this  is  based  on  the  bioactive  components  present  in  the
nutraceuticals, so the nutraceutical already we have defined they are from nature and such asplant, animal or marine sources which are utilized for desired health benefits and functional
components of nutraceuticals are well-characterized and standardized herbal preparations,
fractions or extracts comprising bioactive components and served as a active ingredients of
food and pharmaceuticals preparations. Our GI lumen is inhabited by a larger number of
bacteria, and the consequences of these microbiota on gastrointestinal track are not well
understood, so we already know our gas intestinal lumen inhabited by a large number of
bacteria  which  are  called  micro  biota,  so  but  their  exact  consequences  still  not  well
understood but still the research is going on.
(Refer Slide Time: 42:56)
And microbiota are equally important in Gl health that is a known fact but scientific evidence
are  still  avoided  in particularly  which  way  it  helps  and  some  of them  also serve as  a
nutraceuticals and act as a friendly bacteria. So now the research is going on. So among those
microbiota, so which particular bacteria has effect on diseases or which particular bacteria
has a therapeutic value. So, these friendly bacteria protect the intestinal tract from contentious
bacteria and yeast and also strengthen the immune system contribute in synthesis of vitamin
K,  so  this  particular  microbiota  GI  contributes  in  the  synthesis  of  vitamin  K,  also  it
strengthens the immune system and also it fights against the contentious bacteria.
Antibiotic therapy, stress and poor dietary choices are a major cause of intestinal dysbiosis
causing bacterial imbalance. So we understood in GI tract you have a friendly bacteria as well
as the contentious bacteria, so the bacterial imbalance is called as a dysbiosis. So when this
particular thing happen is antibiotic therapy if we take more antibiotics or due to stress or due
to poor dietary choices so there may be a bacterial imbalance, so that means the friendlybacteria is gets killed. So, contentious bacterial population increases, so such kind of bacterial
imbalance is called dysbiosis, so overconsumption of antibiotics destroys the healthy bacteria
of our digestive system, so what we take as antibiotics, so it acts against all bacterias so in
that way healthy bacteria also get killed.
(Refer Slide Time: 44:54) 
So probiotics whatever we give to restore the balance of microbiota and helps to maintain the
microbial  balance by adding healthy  bacteria  in our intestinal  tract. So if such kind of
dysbiosis happens, so we supposed to take probiotics supplements which restore the balance
of microbiota and helps to maintain the microbial balance by adding healthy bacteria in our
intestinal tract. Bacteria commonly used as probiotics are Lactobacillus acidophilus we have
already seen and Bifidobacterium found in fermented foods such as sauerkraut as well as
yogurt, and prebiotics are dietary food stuffs that help in the growth and propagation of
healthy  bacteria.  So  prebiotics  are  dietary  food  stuffs  which  help  in  the  growth  and
propagation of healthy bacteria. 
So, probiotics are the one in which the healthy bacteria is directly added into the intestinal
tract but prebiotics are dietary food stuffs so that helps in the growth and propagation of
healthy  bacteria,  so  these  nondigestible  carbohydrate  fibers  generally  come  from
oligosaccharides such as fruits, legumes, and whole grains. So which one these nondigestible
carbohydrate  fibers  so  these  are  nothing  but  a  prebiotics  dietary  food  stuffs  so  these
nondigestible  carbohydrate  fibers  generally  come  from  oligosaccharides  such  as  fruits,
legumes, and whole grains. Several researches also demonstrated that effect of prebiotics onintestinal microbiota. So when we take such a food stuffs which has a prebiotics affect so
what its effects on GI tract so that research is also available.
(Refer Slide Time: 46:52) 
And proteins and peptides, proteins we already know they are long chain fatty acids so they
also form a peptides and proteins remain indigestible in gut and promote excretion of bile and
toxins  and  they  further  convert  into  peptides  and  are  absorbed  into  blood  circulation.
Buckwheat and soy protein assist in the maintenance of healthy gut, and bioactive peptides
from soy proteins are capable of lowering blood cholesterol level so this are all functions of
proteins  or  applications  of  proteins  as  a  nutraceuticals  and  bioactive  peptides  are
multifunctional units with large biological outcomes like antimicrobial, antifungal, blood
cholesterol lowering, blood pressure lowering and anti-thrombotic and immunomodulatory
effects and localized effects in the gut. So proteins are involved in all these therapeutic
effects.(Refer Slide Time: 47:56) 
Carbohydrates are major micronutrients constituting a large part of our diet in the form of
sugars, oligosacchandes, starches, and fibers. So almost 55 percentage of the calories in our
daily diet are derived from carbohydrates. And dietary fibers are part of the function of
carbohydrate in the maintenance of bowel movement and carbohydrates can be obtained from
diverse  sources  ranging  from  fruits  to  grains  and  most  popular  marketed  carbohydrate
product is fortified  infant  formula, composed of fructose oligosaccharides  and galactose
oligosaccharides. So they help in development of the immune system of a neonates, neonates
are new borns.
(Refer Slide Time: 48:45)
So lipids and fatty acids, so as we told already fish oil is a common functional food it is
reported to reduce the blood pressure and even lower the risk of cardiovascular diseases and
fish oil is rich in health promoting omega fatty acids, especially omega 3 and omega 6 fatty
acids and omega 3 fatty acids in fish oil are docosahexaenoic acid and eicospentaenoic acid
so DHA and EPA. DHA is an important component contributing in memory functions of the
brain.
Recently DHA is very popular in health drinks and as well as baby foods you must have seen
may advertisements and is incorporated to enhance the memory function of the brain, so
DHA and in elders DHA reduces the chances of Alzheimer disease. In children, so DHA
enhance the memory function of the brain, in elders DHA reduces the chances of Alzheimer’s
disease,  other  important  omega  fatty  acids  are  linoleic  acid  and  linolenic  acid  with
cardiovascular benefits.
(Refer Slide Time: 50:03) 
Then lycopene, so they are abundantly available compound present in tomatoes and other
colorful fruits, vegetables like papaya, watermelon, carrot, pink guava, and black grapes. And
cooked depth tomatoes are served as a better source of lycopenes then raw tomatoes and
concentrated tomato products like sauces, pastes, and ketchups are available in the market as
rich sources of lycopene. 
And lycopene exhibits an antioxidant effect, neutralizing the harmful reactive oxygen species
in our body. So if the oxidation happens that produces ROS which is nothing but a reactive
oxygen species, so this ROS damages the cell DNA and even causes the cancer, so they causelipid peroxidation and damage the heart and blood vessels leading to hypertension. So, these
lycopene is reported to reduce the blood pressure in hypertension patients, so that is the way
it is also served as a antioxidant as well as it is reported to reduce the blood pressure in
hypertension patients.
(Refer Slide Time: 51:20) 
Vitamins  so they are very important dietary supplements  and nutritional components  of
nutraceuticals, so folic acid and vitamin B group components are important due to their
chemopreventive roles in many diseases like cancer, heart diseases, and birth defects. And
epidemiological studies unveil that certain minerals like iron, calcium and iodine along with
vitamins such as folate, vitamin E, B6 and A are a significant part of the diet. So these are all
to be in the diet as a, significant food components.(Refer Slide Time: 52:01)
Vitamin B12 along with folic acid protects from heart diseases, like vitamin B12 is important
for heart diseases, and another important component is vitamin D which has a significant role
in bone diseases and it also prevents osteoporosis and certain cancers, so this I have told
during the dietary supplements as well. And a vitamin E supplement in a 100 international
unit daily dosage for 2 hour more than 2 years prevents the health related risk, whereas
vitamin C supplementation for about nearly 10 years reduces the risk of cataracts. And
vitamin C deficiency can lead to scurvy or unhealthy teeth and gums. Similarly, vitamin A
deficiency can cause the night blindness.
(Refer Slide Time: 52:56)
So the next and last one is polyphenols, so the polyphenols are plant based phytocompounds
they are produced as a secondary metabolites in plants to circumvent photosynthetic stress
and oxidative stress, to circumvent the photosynthetic and oxidative stress they produce the
phytochemicals  and  derived  from  various  food  sources  like  vegetables,  fruits,  legumes,
cereals, whole grains, coffee, tea, cocoa, wine, there exist nearly 8000 polyphenols including
flavones, flavonols and flavanones and flavan-3-ols and anthocyanins.
So most of them we have also seen in the phytochemicals in few slide earlier. The phenolic
acids constitute a major portion of a polyphenols rich diet including hydroxybenzoic acid
derivatives  which  are  garlic  acid,  photocatechuic  acid  and  p-hydroxybenzoic  acid  and
hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives which are nothing but chlorogenic, caffeic and coumaric
and sinapic and ferulic acid. So not only phenols, polyphenols the phenolic acid are also the
major portion of polyphenols rich diet in which includes hydroxybenzoic acid derivative as
well as hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives, so the examples are given here.
(Refer Slide Time: 54:37)
So, usually what are all the food varieties where polyphenols are present kiwi, berry fruits,
apple, cherry, pear, coffee, chicory are source of high phenolic acid. The class of polyphenols
present in human diet is a, flavonoids, so flavonoids which also contains major components
which  are  flavones,  isoflavones  and  flavanols  and  flavanones  and  anthocyanins.  So
everything also comes under the category of flavonoids. The natural sources of flavonoids are
berries, cherry, red cabbage, black grape and strawberry and wine, so which also contains
these components.(Refer Slide Time: 55:26) 
So they can affect numerous cellular processes like apoptosis, gene expression, intercellular
signaling  and  platelet  aggregation  advocating  their  anticarcinogenic  and  antiatherogenic
association, apart from this, polyphenols exhibited enormous therapeutic effects, for example
anti-inflammatory,  anti-oxidant,  anti-microbial,  anti-diabetes,  cardio  protective  activities
which prevent neurodegenerative diseases. The pharmacological effects of polyphenols are
restricted due to their pharmacokinetic profile as a low bioavailability of polyphenols, so this
is important because when it goes to GI tract it cannot be observed by the GI tract, so that is
main disadvantage, so the pharmacokinetic profile as low availability of polyphenols.
So,  that  means  the  pharmacological  effects  of  polyphenols  are  restricted  due  to  their
pharmacokinetic profile as low bioavailability of polyphenols, so the pharmacokinetic profile
of polyphenols depends on various factors like chemical properties preparations of process
and gastrointestinal digestion and intestinal absorption and metabolism via enzymes along
with conjugation and reconjugation in the intestines. So, normally these polyphenols may not
be  fully  absorbed  in  the  intestinal  tract  due  to  that  low  bioavailability,  so  these
pharmacological effects of polyphenols are restricted based on their pharmacokinetic profile,
so  without  its  pharmacokinetic  profile  so  we  cannot  comment  on  anything  on  their
pharmacological effects even if you take as a oral administration so it cannot be observed in
the GI tract.(Refer Slide Time: 57:36)
So that is all about the nutraceuticals and these are your references and additional resources
you may like to refers for further. So the today’s lecture mostly taken from this particular
references and you can refer other to also to get to know, and as I said in the starting of the
lecture so the therapeutic values or their therapeutic nature of all these bioactive components
taken from the book which has also got proper scientific evidences. So, without which it
cannot be taken directly, so that one should remember. So with this I will end this lecture and
we will see tomorrow about the food packaging materials, thank you.