Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Department of Chemical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Lecture No. 25
Food Biosensors
Good morning everyone! Today we are going to see about food biosensor. Last two classes
we have seen about various heat exchangers used in the food industry and then various dryers
used  in  the  food  industry.  And  last  class  especially  we  have  seen  about  the  extrusion
technology, that is the special lecture because the extrusion technology also involves thermal
processing.  Then  next  lecture  is  about  the  recent  measurement  techniques  in  the  food
processing.
Food processing industries used to measure particular toxic components. So in that direction
first thing is so I should be able to measure how much toxin is there. So based on that only
any further processing can be done. So to measure the particular concentration of the food
spoilage enzymes and various proteins and organophosphate components, toxins. So these
biosensors are used. So in this lecture we are going to see about the working principle and
what is biosensors and some of the applications in the food processing industry.
Otherwise  the  techniques  used  are  based  on  for  example,  potentiometric  mechanism,
colorimetric mechanism. So that we are not going to discuss about. So here we are only going
to talk about the biosensing technique not for the mechanism in which it is built. So if you are
interested in knowing that in depth, so I request you to refer the proper electrochemistry book
to get to know the exact mechanism. So we are going to discuss only biosensors.(Refer Slide Time: 2:24)
So the introduction is safety of food and environment is a concern of food technologists and
health scientists. So that is why we are here, because the course is about thermal processing
still we are discussing about the biosensors because it also leads to safety of food and
environment. The strong need for rapid, sensitive detection of different components of foods
and  beverages  along  with  the  food  borne  and  water  borne  pathogens,  toxins,  pesticide
residues with high specificity. So the thermal processing is employed in the food just to
handle with the food borne as well as water borne pathogens as well as toxins present in the
food material.
So to do that first of all I will be able to detect them like how much quantity or how much
concentration it is available in the food. So the rapid and sensitive detection, this is very
much important because already we have analytical techniques to measure them. So what we
wanted is as the research is progressing so we want everything in handy. So handy as well as
rapid. So the rapid and sensitive detection of different components, foods and beverages as
well as the food borne water borne pathogens, toxins, pesticide residues with high specificity.
So that means so we are very much specific about particular component.
So the sensor what I am using should not show me the other components which are present in
the particular food. So it needs high specificity towards the component measured. So example
is optical based sensing system that measure luminescence, so luminescence in the sense
when  not  heated  it  emits  light.  So  based  on  which  based  on  some  chemical  reactions
happened in the analyte. Due to chemical reactions or atomic motions or stress on the crystalsit emits light. But there is no need for to heat. So that is nothing but luminescence and
fluorescence.
Fluorescence, you all might know. So fluorescence is emit light which emits light under
adsorption of electromagnetic radiation, electromagnetic radiation, radiation. So we can call
them as for example, UV light. When adsorbing UV light, it emits the light. So luminescence
also I can tell as category of fluorescence but when not heated due to chemical reactions or
the atomic motions or stress on crystals it emits the light. And reflectance you know the light
is  reflected.  And  absorbance  you  know  it  gets  adsorbed,  etcetera,  are  some  areas  of
applications  of  optical  immunosensor,  optical  immunosensor.  So  when  immunological
reactions happen, so it emits light, so that is measured and after that it is getting converted
into digital signal. So in that way it senses how much analyte concentration is there in the
food particle. So this is one of the example for biosensors.
(Refer Slide Time: 6:30)
Then immunological methods rely on specific bind of an antibody to an antigen. So this is
another example. So as I said here so we are telling optical based sensing system. So which it
senses, it senses the how much light is emitted that is converted finally into electrical signal.
So when the light is emitted, we told that there is some chemical reactions. But in biosensor
there may be some biochemical reactions. So that is what told here immunological methods
rely on specific binding of an antibody. So what is antibody? It is a protein in the blood or
maybe other body fluids also, other body fluids of maybe we can put it vertebrates.
So these are all protein which is present in the blood or we can call it as other body fluids of
vertebrates. So what it does? It does the recognition part of it, recognition in the sense it
recognizes the unique part of the foreign target called antigen. So it unique , unique part of
the foreign target. So what is this unique part of d foreign target, that is nothing but your
antigen. So this is the protein so which recognizes only unique part. Unique part in the sense
specific antibody recognizes only the specific antigen. So that is what it is said, unique part of
the foreign target.
So what is antigen? So this may be any harmful substance, any harmful substance which
enters the body and maybe it also causes the body to produce antibodies. So antibody is
nothing but a protein which recognize unique part of the foreign target. The foreign target is
nothing but antigen. So what is antigen? Antigen is any harmful substance which enters into
the body, it signals the or it causes the body to produce antibodies. So this antigen gets
binded  into  antibody.  So these  immunological  methods  basically  rely  on  this  particular
mechanism.So this antibody may be monoclonal, polyclonal or engineered also. So based on the antigen
we  can  create  a  antibody.  That  is  what  the  engineered  antibody  or  engineered  protein.
Antibodies are basically a protein. So detection of specific microorganisms and microbial
toxins requires immobilization of specific antibodies onto a given transducer that can produce
signal upon attachment of a typical microbe or microbial toxins.
So another detection method is the specific microorganisms and microbial toxins, so for
example, I wanted to detect microorganism X or the toxin produced by microorganism X
which requires this immobilization of specific antibodies, so that means the proteins onto the
given transducer. Transducer is an element which converts one particular signal into another
signal. For example, whatever physicochemical signal is given to the transducer it converts
the physicochemical signal into electrical signals, then further it is converted into digital
signals.
So what it is told? So if I want to specifically identify the organism or quantitatively identify
the microorganism X or the toxin produced by the microorganism X which requires the
immobilization of specific antibodies onto the given transducer, that can produce signal upon
attachment of typical microbe or microbial toxins. So here microbe or microbial toxins are
the antigens. So these antigens where it gets bind, so that is nothing but antibody.
So that particular specific antibody is attached into transducer. So when the antigen goes and
binds with the antibody, so definitely a physicochemical signal is produced given to the
transducer. So this transducer further converts the physicochemical signal into electrical
signal. Inherent features of immunosensors such as specificity as I told, particular antigen
will bind into particular antibody. Sensitivity, sensitivity is nothing but how sensitive it is. So
like how quickly it can measure the physicochemical signal.
And speed, ease and on-site analysis. For example, I told there are conventional methods also
available. There are conventional methods which are available but conventional method are
lab bound. We can carry within hand. So if I want to measure the glucose level while
travelling in the train, then I will be able to do by using biosensor but that not I cannot carry
with me ease. So that is another important.
So ease and on-site analysis can be made used for various applications. So that is also
advantage of biosensors. Biosensors present attractive, efficient alternative techniques by
providing quick reliable performance. So that is where the biosensors are very much wantedin the food industry. So we have also discussed in one of the lectures TTI, time-temperature-
integrators. In that also we have discussed about the using amylase how the microorganism
detection can be done. So that is also one kind of biosensor.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:34)
So food preservation maintains food at a desired level of properties and or nature for their
maximum benefits, so it should not be spoiled. So the properties should be maintained should
not be spoiled due to microorganism  or enzyme reaction.  So that is desired level  also,
maintaining the desired level of properties very much important. Each steps of handling,
processing, storage, distribution affects the characteristics of the food.
So what we have mostly seen in previous lecture is handling and processing. But storage and
distribution also there may be a chance for the contamination, so which may be desirable or
undesirable. Sometimes it may be a desirable change, sometimes it may be a undesirable
change. Understanding the effects of each preservation method and handling procedure of
foods is critical in food processing which lead to the safe food.
So monitoring of safety and nutritional quality of food are very essential. So then and there
during processing, during handling, during storage, during distribution every point of contact,
so  we  need  to  monitor  the  safety  and  nutritional  quality.  The  conventional  analytical
techniques which are used to check this quality and safety are tedious, time-consuming,
require trained personal. Quick, sensitive, reliable techniques for quick monitoring of food
quality and safety is very much essential. That is why we are here to discuss biosensors.(Refer Slide Time: 15:13)
So now what is biosensor? Their specificity, biosensor specificity from biological binding
reaction, so one I told is antigen, antibody. Antibody, antigen so that is example which is
derived from a range of interactions that include antigen, antibody. So by now you know
what is antibody, what is antigen. Enzyme substrate cofactor, so that means so substrate in
the presence of enzyme it is converted into product. Cofactor is nothing but ions which
increase the activity of the catalyst.
Catalyst here is nothing but enzyme. It is said that it is a biological binding reaction. It may
be due to antigen or antibody relation or enzyme substrate cofactor. That relation or receptor
ligand. So the ligand comes and attaches into the receptor, same like antibody antigen. So this
has specific sites. The receptor has specific sites where ligand comes and binds with it. Or
chemical  interactions  and  nucleic  acid  hybridization  in  combination  with  a  range  of
transducer.
So in any biosensor so you will be able to find one bio-receptor. So what is this bio-receptor?
Bio-receptor  if  you  see  this  combination  antibody  is  the  bio-receptor.  If  you  see  this
combination the enzyme is the receptor where substrate comes and binds and gets converted
into product and product moves out. So if you see ligand and receptor, so your receptor is a
receptor where ligand comes and binds.
Or chemical reactions and nucleic acid hybridization is also there. So this is nothing but a
bio-receptor component, so which we call it as a recognition. So then it is given to whatever
physicochemical signal produced from the bio-receptor is sent to the transducer, so whichproduces electrical signal. So this is nothing but a recognition compound. So then the next
one is this is nothing but a transduction.
So then I need to process this signal processing, electrical signal I will be able to process the
signal, signal processing. So then after that it is converted into digital signal what we get to
see in the digital display, digital signal. This is what overall happening. So this bio-receptor
so in combination with a range of transducer. So this transducer can take any type of signal.
So I told here physicochemical signal, so it may be a optical signal, it may be colorimetric
signal, it may be electrochemical signal or it may be a physio electric signal, any signal.
Range of transducers will be used here in the transduction component. So a biosensor can be
defined as a quantitative or semi-quantitative analytical instrumental technique containing a
sensing  element  of  biological  origin,  that  is  nothing  but  a  bio-receptor  which  is  either
integrated within or is in intimate contact with the physicochemical transducer. So this is
separately attached. So that is what integrated within or is in intimate contact.
So this bio-receptor can go inside the transducer as well. So either integrated within or is in
intimate contact with the physicochemical transducer. So this is what whole mechanism
biosensor, I need to have one bio-receptor which recognizes the analyte, then it produces
physicochemical,  sorry  physicochemical  that  is,  physicochemical.  So  it  produces  the
physicochemical  signal  so  which  is  given  to  the  transducer  which  converts  this
physicochemical signal into the electrical signal.
So this electrical signal is further processed using signal processing technique and which
gives the digital signal, that is we get to see in the display. So now we are going to see
because the transducer signal processing is not our hand, so we are going to take care of this
bio-receptor component. So that means so I need to identify which is the antigen, which is the
antibody, which is the receptor, which is the ligand, which is the substrate or which is the
enzyme. So based if I could find out that combination then easily I can put it into the bio-
receptor module which creates further either optical or physio electrical or colorimetric or
potentiometric signal. That will be given to the transducer and further process goes on.(Refer Slide Time: 20:52)
So a chemical sensor transforms chemical information ranging from the concentration of the
specific sample component to a total composition analysis into an analytically useful signal.
So the biosensor is derived from the chemical sensor. What chemical sensor does? Chemical
sensor transforms the chemical information ranging from the concentration of the specific
sample component to a total composition analysis into an analytically useful signal. So this
chemical sensor also usually contain one is chemical recognition. So there it is a molecular
recognition system which is called as a receptor and physicochemical transducer.
So based on the chemical sensor only the biosensors are derived. So in the biosensor it
usually contains the biochemical mechanism. Here it is a chemical recognition. So here it is a
biochemical  mechanism  interfacing  the  optoelectronic  system.  Optoelectronic  system  is
nothing but a transducer and further processing. A device that uses the specific biochemical
reactions mediated by isolated enzymes, immunosystems, tissues, organelles or whole cells to
detect the chemical compounds usually by electrical, thermal or optical signals.
A device that uses the specific biochemical reactions, so those biochemical reactions were
mediated by isolated enzyme, this is what we have told in the enzyme-substrate cofactor
system.  Immunosystem  is  nothing  but  antibody  antigen.  Sometimes  it  is  not  only  this
enzymes or antibody antigen system, it may be a whole microbial, we call it as a microbial
biosensor. So there we will get to see either tissues or whole cells to detect the chemical
components usually by electrical, thermal or optical signals. So these were given to the
transducer.(Refer Slide Time: 22:59)
So what are all the prerequisites for biosensor? As I said earlier, selectivity, so high selective
for the target analyte. Target analyte, it is nothing but what we are going to measure. And
show minimum or no cross reactivity with moieties having similar chemical structure. So as I
said when antibody is a protein, so which antigen is a toxic compound or maybe our target
analyte which goes and binds in the antibody.
So if there are any similar chemical structure of moieties present in my food particle, so the
antibody should not get confused to find out which is the target or which is the moiety which
has the similar chemical structure with the target analyte. So that is very much important.
And sensitivity, the biosensor device should be able to measure in the range of interest for a
given  target  analyte  with  minimum  additional  steps  such  as  pre  cleaning  and  pre
concentration of the sample without doing any preprocessing.
So my biosensor should be able to measure in the range of interest for a given target analyte.
For  example,  this  particular  concentration  to  this  particular  concentration  without  any
additional steps. Then linearity of response. The linear response range of the system should
cover the concentration range over which the target analyte is to be measured. So that means
if I am measuring with respect to electrode potential, so the potential versus concentration
should be in linear.
So that is what linear response range of the system should cover the concentration. For
example, which concentration, minimum concentration to maximum concentration it shouldgive  me  linear  relationship,  linear  response  range  of  the  system  should  cover  the
concentration range over which the target analyte is to be measured.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:01)
The next one is reproducibility of signal process. So reproducibility already you know. So
how many hour times I measure it should give me same response. So that is nothing but
reproducibility. The next one is quick response time and recovery time. So this is another
reason why we go for biosensor. The biosensor device response should be quick enough so
that the real time monitoring of the target analyte can be done efficiently.
The recovery time should be small for reusability of the biosensor system. Because how
many  uses  it  go  that  is  also  depend  upon  the  quick  response  time  and  recovery  time.
Recovery time in the sense, so after measuring one particular target analyte how quick it
comes back to the original position. So that depends upon the, recovery time should be small
for reusability of the biosensor system. So that means so for example, one particular food I
am measuring the low concentration of the target analyte.
Another food material I am going to measure the target analyte concentration in one sample
and another sample is different. So first sample if I am measuring so it should recover to the
original position so that it can be measured in the second sample. If the recovery time is high,
then I need to wait because or it may interfere the concentration of the target analyte in the
second sample as well.
So the response time  and recovery  time  should be very much  small. The  stability  and
operating  life:  As  much  most  of  the  biological  compounds  are  unstable  in  differentbiochemical and environmental conditions. Mostly biological compounds are very unstable.
The biological element used should be interfaced such that the activity is retained for a long
time so as to make the device marketable and practically useful in the field. So that is
important. So we told that bio-receptor recognition.
Before recognition so your biological compounds should not go to other state because we
have seen that most of the biological compounds are unstable so that this unstable state
should be high enough to give the room for the biosensor to recognize or sense the biological
compounds. So that is also important, stability. Or the device should be able to measure the
particular biological compounds within their unstable state. So that is also important.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:44)
So the key component of a biosensor is the transducer which makes use of a physical change
accompanying the reaction. So what are all physical change? If heat output or absorbed, heat
input or output by a reaction, so that is nothing but a colorimetric biosensor. So as I told here,
I have a bio-receptor. So here I have a transducer. So based on which kind of signals I am
giving to transducer, so that is where here if heat output by the reaction, that is nothing but a
colorimetric signal I will give. Signal will be of colorimetric.
If there is changes in the electrical or electronic output that is nothing but a electrochemical
signal I will be giving into transducer. If there is any redox reaction so what we give is
amperometric.  So  that  is  called  amperometric  biosensors.  And  light  output  or  light
absorbance difference between the reactants and products are given, that is called optical
biosensor. So I may be giving optical signal as well.Based on mass of the reactants and products we call it as a piezoelectric biosensor. So in that
case I would I will be giving piezoelectric signal to the transducer. The working principle is
based on which signal or which physicochemical signal I am giving into transducer. It may be
colorimetric, it may be electrochemical, it may be amperometric, it may be optical or it may
be piezoelectric. So as I said earlier, we are not going into detail about each working principle
because it is just introduction of food biosensor but we will see as much as possible.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:49)
The electrical signal from the transducer is often weak with heavy noise. So to increase the
signal to noise ratio a reference baseline signal derived from a similar transducer without any
bio catalytic membrane from the sample signal should be used.(Refer Slide Time: 30:10)
So  if  you  remember  here  we  have  seen  about  the  recognition,  transduction  and  signal
processing. So we will see here.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:17)
So what we told is bio-receptor component or we can say this as something like this. So this
is my reaction site or reaction pad we call it. So here you have a substrate. So your enzyme is
attached, this substrate converts into product. So this is one particular example I have taken.
So what happens, then after that it creates  any one of this reaction or this biochemical
reaction is converted into any one of the signal.If  you  use  optical  biosensor, it  is  optical.  So if it  is, if you are  using  electrochemical
biosensor, it is a electrochemical signal. So if you are using colorimetric, it is a colorimetric
signal. Or if you are using potentiometric it is a potentiometric signal. So all these signals are
fed into transducer. So after the transducer it goes to amplifier, that is what they are saying.
So this is amplifier. So when it is given to amplifier, it is supposed to give me the, it supposed
to go to processor. From the processor it will give the digital display.
So when it converts the optical or electrochemical or colorimetric or potentiometric signal, so
this transducer produce the electrical signal. So this electrical signal will be of weak and
heavy noise. So electrical signal will be weak with heavy noise. So to avoid that we are
introducing a reference signal. To increase the signal to noise ratio your reference baseline
signal derived from a similar transducer without any biocatalytic membrane from the sample
signal should be used. So this is without any biocatalytic membrane.
So this reference signal is used in the amplifier. So this is nothing but amplifier. So with this
particular weak heavy noise signal is compared with the reference signal. So that is the way
signal to noise ratio is increased in the amplifier. So this is further go to processor, processor
is signal processing. So it creates the electrical output, that electrical output is amplified then
given to the signal processing unit. From the signal processing unit what we get is a digital
display.
So now understood, working principle is, so for example, I have reaction pad. Here I have
taken the enzyme substrate cofactor biochemical reaction. The substrate the enzyme is kept in
the reaction pad, so substrate comes and binds with the enzyme and converts into product. So
this particular biochemical reaction is produced as a electrochemical optical or colorimetric
or potentiometric signal, so which is further fed into transducer. So this transducer produces
the electrical signal. So that particular electrical signal is weak as well as heavy noisy. To
avoid that or to increase the signal to noise ratio so we are using a reference electrical signal,
so which is produced from the transducer without any biocatalytic membrane.
So then the produced electrical signal from the transducer is compared with the reference
signal. This is processed in the amplifier and fed into the processor which process the signal
and gives the digital display. This is what working principle. The difference between the
signals is very weak and amplified as a readable output in amplifier. The above process
removes the unwanted noise from the signal, that is what happened in the amplifier. The
analog signal produced by amplifier is usually converted into digital signal and passed to amicroprocessor. So the data is processed, converted into a concentration units and output to
display device or data is stored. So this is a digital signal. And digital display includes digital
signal  prediction  and  passed  to  the  microprocessor.  From  the  microprocessor  the  data
produced  is  converted  into  concentration  units.  Concentration  units  in  the  sense  the
concentration of target analyte. And output is displayed in your display device or it is stored
for further data analysis.
(Refer Slide Time: 35:39)
So we told there are two components. One is biological recognition component, another one
is a physical transducer. So what are all the kinds of various kinds of biological recognition
element? So one is enzyme based, another one is whole cell based, another one is affinity
biomolecule based. The enzyme based are, what are all the example? Catalytic transformation
of specific substrates. So in the presence of catalyst how the specific substrate which is
nothing but analyte gets transformed? So for example, phenol detection using tyrosinase. So
this tyrosinase is nothing but a we call it as a polyphenol oxidase.
So this is the enzyme which is nothing but a tyrosinase. So what happens is you have a
catechol, first phenol is converted into catechol. So in presence of tyrosinase so this catechol
is converted into ortho-quinone. So this particular reaction is measured by the enzyme based
biological recognition element. So catechol is nothing but 2 OH, so which converted into
tyrosinase in the presence of tyrosinase, so which is nothing but giving the oxygen, so which
is a oxidase. So then which gives 2, so which we call it as a ortho-quinone. So what comes is
2 H2O, so this is what the reaction is.So if the phenol component is there in presence of tyrosinase, so as I told here so this is the
reaction pad. So tyrosinase is kept in the reaction pad, so substrate which is nothing but a
phenol which comes and gets converted into ortho-quinone. So I will be able to measure this
particular product. So how much this product is there, that is proportional to the how much
phenol is there in the particular food material. So that is the way the phenol detection using
tyrosinase is done. So this is nothing but enzyme based recognition.
So enzyme based recognition is this enzyme is kept in the electrode. For example, if you want
this use the electrochemical transducer, so for potentiometric electrode in one electrode this
particular enzyme is kept. So when the electrode seize the target analyte which is nothing but
a phenol, so phenol comes and attaches in the tyrosinase. So then it converts into ortho-
quinone. So this conversion is detected as any one of the signal. For example, here it is
detected as a electrochemical signal. Then that is further fed into transducer, then electrical
signal then further processing is done.
And another example is specific inhibition of enzyme activity by the target analyte. It is not
only  the  target  analyte  comes  and  binds  with  the  enzyme  and  produces  the  product,
sometimes it is a specific inhibition also. For example, acetylcholine esterase inhibition by
organophosphates.  Acetylcholine  esterase  inhibition  by  organophosphates.  So  these
organophosphates are present toxins which is present in the insecticides.
So this organophosphates, so this acetylcholine esterase is the enzyme which converts the or
which degrade the acetylcholine. So acetylcholine esterase degrades the or it takes for the
degradation reaction of acetylcholine. So what happens is organophosphates present in the
insecticides goes and inhibit the activity acetylcholine esterase. So that is the reason the
degradation of acetylcholine stops. So the biological recognition element can be of specific
inhibition of enzyme activity as well.
So the next one is effect of enzyme activity by the target analyte which acts a modulator of
cofactor enzyme. So here we talked about the phenol is or catechol is converted into ortho-
quinone in the presence of tyrosinase. This tyrosinase can be activated by using certain ions,
it is not tyrosinase here exactly, so I am telling this kind of enzymes can be activated by
further modulator of cofactor enzyme.
So this mostly they are ions. So your enzyme based recognition can be done in three ways.
One is catalytic transformation of specific substrate and another one is specific inhibition ofenzyme activity by a target analyte. And another way it can be done is effect of enzyme
activity by the target analyte which acts as a modulator for co-enzyme activity. So how much
target analyte is there? I will be able to measure by increase in activity of the particular
enzyme because the target analyte increases the activity of the particular enzyme.
If the activity of the enzyme is increased, obviously the substrate to produce conversion is
going to be increased. The second recognition component is whole cell based. So the general
inhibition of cellular respiration that is disturbed, so in that way we will be able to measure
the target analyte. And another one is the analyte acting as a inducer or specific catalytic
protein. If you are having a whole cell attached into the, for example here if you are using the
potentiometric electrochemical transducer, this whole cell is attached into the electrode.
So the analyte which is going to be measured acting as a inducer of specific catalytic protein.
So based on the measurement of specific catalytic protein I can measure the analyte. Then the
third  one  affinity  biomolecule  based.  So  this  is  antibody  antigen,  ligand-receptor  or
sometimes  nucleic  acids. So the  hybridization  of nucleic  acid.  So based  on these three
varieties of biological recognition component so biosensors were made.
And  physical  transducer  wise  we  already  discussed  electrochemical,  potentiometric,
amperometric,  colorimetric.  Amperometric  is  based  on  redox  or  oxidation  reaction.
Potentiometric is based on potential difference. Colorimetric is based on the temperature
difference. And optical optoelectronic sensors, light based potentiometric sensors, surface
Plasmon resonance, so this is based on the refractive index. And UV visible absorbance, so
you are all very well know based on the absorbance of the UV light. And luminescence and
fluorescence we have already told. The total internal reflection, so TAR, based on that as well
the optical biosensors are made.
The next one is piezoelectric, so it is based on quartz crystal which converts the signal, quartz
crystal microbalance. The next one is surface acoustic wave sensor, so that is also comes
under the category of piezoelectric transducer. The last category is thermal sensors. So this is
isothermal  titration  calorimetry,  so  it  comes  also  under  the  category  of  colorimetric
electrochemical transducer. The next one is heat sensitive change in the polymer film color.
So this also can be used as a sensing element in the physical transducer.
So the broad category is either electrochemical signal is given to the transducer or optical
signal is given to the transducer or piezoelectric signal is given to the transducer or thermalsignal  is  given  to  the  transducer.  So  this  transducer  further  converts  these  signals  into
electrical signals. So electrical signals are given to the amplifier that is further amplified and
given to the signal processing unit. From the signal processing unit it goes to the digital
processing unit so where it is sent to the microprocessor. So from there we will get the digital
display.
(Refer Slide Time: 44:57)
So now next one is the electrochemical  biosensor, so the electrochemical  sensor where
electrochemical  signals  are generated  during biochemical  reactions  and monitored  using
suitable potentiometric amperometric or conductometric system of analyses. So all comes
under as we discussed here. So all comes under the category of electrochemical transducer;
potentiometric, amperometric, as well as colorimetric. So the electrochemical transducer is
the one where electrochemical signals are generated during biochemical reactions and are
monitored.  So  these  electrochemical  signals  are  monitored  using  suitable  potentiometric
amperometric or conductometric systems of analysis.
So  it  is  considered  as  a  chemically  modified  electrode  since  electronic  conducting
semiconducting or ionic conducting material is coated with the biochemical film. So that is
what I told. For example, in terms of whole cell. So the whole cell is kept in the electrode. So
that is what it is told, it is considered as a chemically modified electrode. It is not a normal
electrode; it is a chemically modified electrode. Since electronic conducting semiconducting
or ionic conducting material is coated with the biochemical film. Many enzyme reactions
such as those of urease and many biological membrane receptors may be monitored by ion
conductometric or imperometric devices using interdigitated microelectrodes.As the sensitivity of the measurement is hindered by a parallel conductance of the sample
solution, so you are aware of that. So in any biochemical reactions I take as a reference. So
here also as the sensitivity of d measurement is hindered by parallel conductance of the
sample solution, usually a differential measurement is preferred. But when a sensor with the
enzyme and an identical one without enzyme, so sensor with enzyme is it is coated with the
biochemical film.
The one without enzyme is without any biochemical film. So the comparative measurement is
taken. It is not comparative measurement in the sense differential measurement. Analytes like
urea,  charged  species  and  oligonucleotides  are  detected  using  this  principle.  So  mostly
biochemical reactions we need to have a reference as well as the sample with the analyte
solution.
(Refer Slide Time: 47:37)
So colorimetric biosensors measure the change in temperature of the solution containing the
analyte following enzyme action and interpret it in terms of the analyte concentration in the
solution.  When  the  enzymatic  reaction  happens,  most  of  the  enzymatic  reactions  are
exothermic. So the heat is liberated, so the system are colorimetric biosensor measure the
change in temperature of the solution which contains  the analyte  following the enzyme
reaction.  Once  the  enzyme  catalytic  reaction  is  happened,  so  there  will  be  exothermic
reaction.
So this exothermic reaction increases the heat. So the heat generated by the reaction is used to
determine the analyte. So that temperature change is measured and interpreted in terms ofanalyte  concentration.  So  this  much  analyte  is  present  in  the  solution,  so  this  much
temperature increment will be there. So colorimetric biosensor are extensively used for the
detection of pesticides and other enzymatic reactions.
(Refer Slide Time: 48:42)
The next one is potentiometric, so potentiometric we have indicator electrode and a reference
electrode. A transducer may be an ion-selective electrode which is an electrochemical sensor
based on the thin films or selective membranes  as recognition elements. So usually the
potentiometric biosensor is something, so we have a reference electrode so which is of Ag or
AgCl. So this is nothing but a reference electrode.
Then this is filled with the internal aqueous solution. So that is filled and here you have a salt
bridge or membrane. So this is nothing but a membrane. So this is nothing but porous
membrane.  A transducer  may be an ion-selective  electrode  which is an electrochemical
sensor based on the thin films or selective membranes as recognition elements. So this is
nothing but recognition element so which has a membrane in it, attached to it.
So the reference electrode is nothing but Ag or AgCl. The most common potentiometric
devices  are pH electrodes.  Several other ion, ion in the sense fluorine, iodine, cyanide,
potassium, sodium, and calcium, NH4, these are all ions, or gas CO2 or NH3 selective
electrodes are available. The most common potentiometric devices are pH electrodes. So
several other gas or selective electrodes are also available.
The potential difference between these indicator and the reference electrodes are proportional
to the logarithmic of ion activity or gas concentration as described by the Nernst-Donnanequation. So then Nernst equation is something like E cell which is equal to E naught cell
minus RT, ZF log of Qr. So this is nothing but the cell potential and cell potential at standard
conditions. R is gas constant, temperature, Z is nothing but number of electron transfer, F is
Faraday’s constant. So Qr is nothing but a quotient, nothing but reaction quotient.
So this Nernst-Donnan equation uses this in equilibrium condition. So Donnan contributed in
the equilibrium concentration. So this particular thing is not necessary here. Here it is a
mechanism is told, so the potential difference between this indicator and, so this is the
indicator and this is the reference electrode. The potential difference is between them, are
proportional  to  the  logarithmic  of  ionic  activity.  So  that  is  what  I  just  told.  So  the
proportionality constant is here nothing but a standard E cell potential.
So or gas concentration, if you are using the ionic electrode it is ionic activity. If you are
using the gas then it is a gas concentration as described by the Nernst-Donnan equation. So
this is Nernst equation. This modified form is Nernst-Donnan equation. So I just wanted to
tell you that it is a proportional to the logarithm of ionic activity. So this we call it as a
reaction quotient. This Q is nothing but a reaction quotient.
(Refer Slide Time: 52:51)
So then is amperometric biosensor. So this is the first commercial biosensor designed by
Leyland and Clark. So this was done to monitor the glucose. The amperometry is based on
the  measurement  of  current  resulting  from  electrochemical  oxidation  or  reduction  of
electroactive species. It is usually performed by maintaining a constant potential at platinumor Au or carbon based working electrode  or an array of electrodes  with respect to the
reference electrode which may be also function as a axillary electrode if currents are low.
So you have one working electrode and one is reference electrode. So if the current are low,
for example, 10 to 9 or 10 to 6 ampere, then axillary electrode is also used. So this is nothing
but your working electrode and one more is reference electrode. The resulting current is
directly interrelated to the bulk concentration of the electroactive species or its production or
consumption rate within the adjacent biocatalytic layer. So this working electrode senses this
bulk concentration of the electroactive species. So then the resulting current between two
electrodes is given as amperometric signal. So that is further converted into electrical signal
using transducer.
(Refer Slide Time: 54:20)
A  biocatalytic  reaction  rates  are  mostly  first  order  dependent  on  the  bulk  analyte
concentration. This we have seen, all enzymatic reactions also of first order reaction. So such
steady currents are usually proportional to the bulk analyte concentration. So these are first
order based on the bulk analyte concentration. So whatever the steady current produced are
usually proportional to the bulk analyte concentration. So amperometric biosensor used in
measuring sugars, alcohols, phenols, then oligonucleotides and oxygen, these are all can be
measured using amperometric biosensor. So it is a single enzyme based also. There multi
enzyme based also there. So single enzyme based the example is acetylcholine esterase what
we have discussed. And there are butyryl cholinesterase also there.So  if  you  remember  acetylcholine  esterase  we  have  discussed  here  in  terms  of  the
organophosphates.  So  as  a  single  enzyme  as  a  biological  component  and  thiocholine
production is monitored amperometrically or acid production is monitored potentiometrically.
So the product based on that you can have any measurement. So the thiocholine production
also  you  can  monitor  using  amperometrically  or  acid  production  is  monitored  using
potentiometrically.
So this is like using a single enzyme based biosensor, either how much substrate is consumed
that also can be measured or how much product is produced that also can be measured. Multi
enzyme based biosensor system is also available which uses the cholinesterase in conjunction
with the choline oxidase, both the enzymes are there and measure the hydrogen peroxide
production or oxygen consumption. So if oxygen consumption is there, there may be a
hydrogen peroxide. That is what we call it as oxidation reaction. So either it can be measured
as a production of hydrogen peroxide or consumption of oxygen. So this uses the multi
enzyme. So one is cholinesterase, another one is choline oxidase, both.
(Refer Slide Time: 56:43)
Then  optical  biosensor  which  are  called  optodes  instead  of  electrodes,  so  they  are
resemblance with the electrodes, this include determining changes in the light absorption
between the reactants and the products of the reaction, measuring the light output by a
luminescent  process.  So  luminescent  process  already  I  told  you.  The  optical  biosensor
integrate optical technique with the biological element to identify chemical or biological
species.Many optical sensors were developed based on the surface plasmon resonance, spectroscopy,
UV spectroscopy, we are very much known to that then evanescent waves. It monitors,
optical  biosensor  is  used  to  monitor  pesticides,  vitamins,  carcinogens,  toxins  based  on
chemiluminescence or fluorescence technique. So optical biosensor similar to electrode but
here it uses the light absorption between the reactants and products to measure the analyte
concentration using a luminescent process. So it can be measured using spectroscopic or
evanescent  waves  or  surface  plasmon  resonance.  So  it  monitors  pesticides,  vitamins,
carcinogens, and toxins based on chemiluminescence or fluorescence technique.
(Refer Slide Time: 58:05)
Then there comes a microbial biosensor. So as I told earlier in previous slides in an analytical
device  which  combines  the  microorganisms  with  the  transducer  to  facilitate  the  rapid,
accurate, sensitive detection of target. So as I told in the reaction pad I kept the enzyme. The
substrate comes and binds and goes a product. So instead of the particular enzyme there can
be  microbial  cells  which  also  can  be  attached.  So  that  is  what  it  says,  combines  the
microorganisms with the transducer to facilitate rapid, accurate, and sensitive detection of
target.
So conventional microbial biosensor used the respiratory and metabolic functions of the
microorganisms to detect the substance that is either a substrate or inhibitor of the process.
For example, as I told if substrate gets converted using particular enzyme, so that particular
enzyme is produced by these microorganisms which is attached to the transducer. So it uses,
how it detects? It uses either respiratory or metabolic functions. Metabolic functions in thesense microorganisms produces the enzyme, that is the enzyme which converts the substrate
into product.
So this can be measured in this way or just by respiration activities of the microorganisms
and whether that is inhibited or activated by the analyte concentration, that way also the
analyte concentration can be measured. Microbial biosensors are more advantageous than
enzyme biosensor, why? Because the construction of enzyme sensors are complex and costly,
because we need to be very much specific about that particular enzyme. Some of the main
types of microbial biosensor, it can operate in amperometric way, potentiometric way or
conductometric way. So that means it can be analyzed based on oxidation and redox reaction
or it may be analyzed based on the potential differences or it may be analyzed based on the
conductivity of the material differences.
(Refer Slide Time: 60:11)
Amperometric microbial biosensor operates at a fixed potential with respect to a reference
electrode and involves the detection of current generated by the oxidation or reduction of the
species at the surface of the electrode. This I told, amperometric microbial biosensor are
extensively used for detection of biological oxygen demand, BOD in industrial waste water
and also used for detection of ethanol, total sugars, organophosphates, cyanide, phenols and
phenolic compounds. Generally potentiometric microbial sensor consists of an ion-selective
electrode, that we have seen somewhere here, so this one or a gas sensing electrode coated
with an immobilized microbe layer. So it is a microbial biosensor, so it is coated with the
immobilized microbial layer. Due to microbial metabolism the uptake or release of analyte
generates a change in potential resulting from an ion accumulation or depletion.(Refer Slide Time: 61:17)
The  potentiometric  transducers  measure  the  potential  difference  between  the  working
electrode and reference electrode. The signal is correlated with the concentration of analyte.
So that is common everywhere. The signals are expressed in the logarithmic relationship
between  the  potential  generated  and  analyte  concentration.  So  wide  detection  range  is
possible.  The  potentiometric  microbial  sensors  are  used  for  the  detection  of
organophosphates, penicillin, tryptophan, urea, trichloroethylene, ethanol, sucrose.
Whole cell biosensor immobilization of pseudomonas alcaligenes MTCC 5264 having the
capability to degrade caffeine were used for the development of caffeine biosensor. In the
caffeine biosensor pseudomonas alcaligenes this is used as a microbial film. So what we are
doing here, we are immobilizing the microbial layer in the electrodes. So the immobilization
of pseudomonas alcaligenes, so this is done in the electrode to check the degradation of
caffeine in the development of caffeine biosensor. The biosensor system was able to detect
caffeine in the solution over the concentration range of 0.1 to 1 milligrams per ml. So this is
the example for potentiometric microbial biosensors.(Refer Slide Time: 62:48)
So immunosensors we will see, this is the example. The immunosensors are affinity ligand
based biosensor. So this I told, you have to have a receptor and ligand. Biosensor devices in
which the immunochemical reaction is coupled to a transducer, they are solid state devices.
So this immunosensors are solid state devices. The fundamental basis of all immunosensors is
the specificity of the molecular recognition of antigens by antibody to form a stable complex
which is similar to the immunoassay methodology, what we use in biochemical detection.
So  the  immunosensors  can  be  classified  based  on  the  detection  principle,  again  the
electrochemical  optical  or microgravimetric,  so based on that  we have seen  already.  In
contrast to immunoassay modern transducer technology enables the label-free detection and
quantification  of  the  immune  complex.  So  how  we  are  going  to  see?  How  it  can  be
measured? Immunobiosensor based on chemiluminescence for detection of vitamin B12, so
that we are going to see. So this is as example. So how the modern transducer technology
enables the label-free detection? Quantification of the immune complex, so the example what
we are going to see is vitamin B12 detection.(Refer Slide Time: 64:16)
So here is even dipstick spotted with the antibody. So this we call it as a dipstick. So this
particular thing is a dipstick. So here in the end we have antibody. So this end looks like this.
So  you  have  antibody,  so  Y  shaped  protein,  antibody  coated  on  a  NC  membrane.  So
nitrocellulose membrane. So this upon washing after washing that this is dipped into vitamin
B12 solution. So this antibody binding with the vitamin B12. So this all red marked.
So this red mark is nothing but a vitamin B12. So vitamin B12 is binding with the antibodies,
then  upon  further  washing  then  this  is  dipped  into  ALP,  alkaline  phosphate  conjugate
solution. So this is dipped into vitamin B12 ALP conjugate solution. So then binding of
vitamin B12 ALP conjugate with antibody. So this star is, blue star is nothing but vitamin
B12 ALP conjugate.
So then further it is dipped into cuvette containing substrate CDP star. So this substrate is
nothing but a luminescence property material. So this substrate CDP star so once it is dipped
into this particular cuvette so it emission of CL due to reaction of ALP conjugate with the
CDP star, so ALP conjugate with the CDP star, so it emits the light, chemiluminescence. So
CL  is  nothing  but  chemiluminescence  emission.  So  this  particular  star  is  nothing  but
chemiluminescence  emission.  So  this  is  Y  is  antibody.  So  once  it  emits  the
chemiluminescence, that is detected by the luminometer, then it further go to data analyzer.
So what we are seeing here, so first the dipstick with antibody is kept in vitamin B12
solution. So the vitamin B12 is getting attached with the antibody. So then further it is dipped
into vitamin B12 ALP conjugate solution. So then ALP conjugate sits in the vitamin B12 andantibody combination. Then further it is dipped into the substrate CDP star. So then it emits
the chemiluminescence due to the reaction between the ALP and CDP star.
So how much chemiluminescence is there, that much ALP is there. How much ALP is there,
that many B12 is there. So that is the way the concentration of B12 is measured using
luminescence technology. So this is the CDP star, so upon ALP so it forms the unstable
intermediate. So this unstable intermediate further gives one particular component, another
component  which  emits  the  light.  So this  is  the  way the  vitamin  B12 concentration  is
measured using chemiluminescence emission. So here I stop.
(Refer Slide Time: 67:24)
So these are references and additional resources for this particular lecture. So you must be
wondering. So each lecture got some extra resources as references. Actually these 10 lectures
are about recent topics in food processing. So I try to include recent research developments
also in this lecture. So that is why I am mentioning where I have taken the recent research
developments in particular lecture. So these three and most of the points were taken from this
particular review article. So I would also request you to check these extra references to get to
know more about that particular topics. Thank you.