Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor. R. Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Lecture No. 23
Importance and Applications of Extrusion Technology
in Food Processing
Good morning everyone. So today we are going to discuss about importance and applications
of extrusion technology in food processing. So last classes we have seen about the thermal
processing equipment. So one is the various heat exchangers used in the industry and after
that drying process, so where your heat transfer as well as mass transfer as involved as a as a
mechanism of processing. So this week, we are going to discuss about the importance and
applications of extrusion technology in food processing, so though the course is all about
thermal processing of food. So we are also seeing what are all the other process which are
included in the thermal processing.
For example, extrusion technology if you see so there is a heat transfer mechanism, mass
transfer mechanism and the pressure changes there, shear changes there. So, altogether along
with main theme of the course, which is nothing but a thermal processing. So in this lecture,
we are going to see what is extrusion and what are all the equipments used for extrusion and
the physical, chemical effects which happens during extrusion on the food and also we see 2
or 3 examples how so how the food material is made using extrusion technology.
(Refer Slide Time: 2:05)
So the first is the definition of extrusion cooking so in the layman language we can say this is
an operation  of force in the material  out of a narrow gap. So this  has got widespread
application in the food industry. So it is nothing but a forcing a material in a narrow gap. So
the industrial applications of extrusion, so how to define the term extrusion in industrial point
of view which is just nothing but a sole function of extrusion is to impart to the product a
certain shape or form. So this is where the extrusion technology is being applied in industries
without otherwise affecting the properties of the material without changing the property of
the material so the product will be imported with certain shape and form. So that process is
nothing but a extrusion, this is the proper definition in industrial terms. 
So example is extrusion in pasta presses and feedstuff pelletizers. So pasta has got if you see
kind of this shape or sometime the long shape also. So these kind of shapes are sometimes the
pellets, pellet form also with shape and size we want so that also can be done using extrusion
technology, industrially extrusion means giving certain shape or form to the food material. So
extrusion cooking may be defined as a thermo mechanical process. It is not only thermal
processing, it is a thermo mechanical process in which heat transfer, mass transfer, pressure
changes and shear are combined to produce effects such as so the mechanism wise heat
transfer is supplied, mass transfer is applied, pressure changes are applied, shear is applied. 
So all these are together applied on the food material to produce the effects such as cooking,
by now you know the sterilization, drying, melting, cooling, texturizing, texturizing in the
sense, giving a proper texture or desirable  texture to the food material then conveying,
puffing, puffing is nothing but a swelling, mixing, kneading, kneading is nothing but a dough
like structure and conching, conching is nothing but it is a particular word applied in the
chocolate. So the mixing of the coco powder and ingredients of sugar, material, coco powder,
the mixing is nothing but conching and freezing and forming. 
So all these operations are simultaneously applied in the extruder. So one or two applications,
maybe  not  needed  for  the  particular  process,  but  these  processes  are  individually  or
combinely or simultaneously applied in the extrusion processing. So that means so lot of
operations we can do together in a single equipment. So which imports the mechanism of
heat transfer, mass transfer, pressure changes as well as shear.
The  extruder  cooker  is  a  pump  which  is  responsible  for  pressure  changes  your  heat
exchanger, which  is  responsible  for  heat  transfer  and  a  continuous  high  pressure,  high
temperature reactor so here, your some of the reactions may happen, for example proteindenaturation. So a continuous high pressure, high temperature reactor all combined into one
piece of equipment. So extrusion is nothing but forcing any material in the narrow gap,
industrially it is nothing but a giving particular shape or form to the food material and lot
many processes are combined together or maybe applied together or individually to process
the food material in extrusion cooking and extruder is nothing but a pump heat exchanger as
well as a continuous high pressure and high temperature reactor in one piece of equipment.
(Refer Slide Time: 6:36)
Then extrusion cooking so little bit history about it. In 930s itself the extrusion cooking is
employed  for production  of pasta products  by a continuous  extrusion  and in 1940s the
cooking extruders for making puffed snacks, so in 1940s itself, they were used and in 60s
only  the  low-cost  extruder,  simple  low-cost  extruders  were  developed.  So  this  is  the
equipment, proper equipment which is exclusively used for the extrusion process for on farm
cooking of soybeans used as a animal feed. So in 1960, the low-cost extruder is develop for
on farm cooking of soybeans, so which is used as a animal feed. 
A decade later, maybe 1970s the low cost extruder cooker technology was adopted and
promoted by International agencies and government for the production of low-cost infant
foods based on oil seed cereal mixture, oil seeds cereal mixture you can say the groundnut or
seasame.  So  from  there,  they  started  producing  the  infant  foods,  so  there  the  low-cost
extruder cooker technology is used. Before that when it is used as animal feed maybe that
hygienic processing conditions may not be needed but when it comes to infant foods proper
GMP regulations should be followed in the equipment as well. So proper low-cost extruder
cooker we started using in the food industry in 1970s to produce infant foods. So extrusion cooking has been used to for that texturization of proteinaceous material of
vegetable  origin.  So  the  extrusion  cooking  has  been  used  to  further  texturization  of
proteinaceous materials of vegetable origin and also to produce meat like structures. So in the
vegetable  origin  itself  and  extrusion  has  also  been  applied  to  the  development  of
biodegradable  and  nano  composite  films  with  interesting  barrier  characteristics.  So  the
vegetable origin material texturization also can be done, texturization in the sense giving
proper texture to the material may be in the fibrous form, so that can be done and also the
meat like structure in the vegetable origin food material itself.
So to look like or feel like it is a meat like food material and extrusion technology also apply
to biodegradable and nano composite films. So this anyway we are going to see in subsequent
lectures, the food packaging so these were all food packaging materials. In the sterilization or
aseptic processing, itself, we have talked about much about the packaging because not only
the processing is important to avoid further contamination packaging is also very much
important. So nowadays the trend is to have biodegradable packaging to avoid the plastic
materials,  normal  conventional  plastic  material  because  when  you  throw  this  into  the
environment, it also gets degrade easily.
In that way it will not cause any environmental pollution. So this extrusion technology is used
to produce such kind of biodegradable films and nano composite films is which is produced
using nano materials. The composite word is nothing but so combining 2 or 3 materials
together  to  aim  for  particular  application  or  advantages.  For  example,  1  particular
biodegradable  polymeric film is not having good oxygen permeability. Then I may add
something or some other secondary material or secondary polymer to make this disadvantage
of oxygen permeability into advantage. So for example for particular food material, I need to
have oxygen permeability very low, so that I am not getting from using single biodegradable
polymer I may add one more polymer to reduce the oxygen permeability of the particular
biodegradable polymer.
So that means I am combining 2 materials to achieve a certain purpose of my application so
that is nothing but a composite film. So if they are done using a nano materials, they are
called nano composite films. So interesting barrier characteristic. Barrier characteristics only
I  told  oxygen  permeability  and  water  vapour  permeability, so  everything  called  barrier
characteristics,  water vapor permeability, so there  also extrusion technology  is  used. So
basically to produce the film or food packaging films.(Refer Slide Time: 11:50)
So extrusion cooking is one step process. So a number of operations are simultaneously
carried out in one piece of equipment, so this does not exclude the need for additional
operations upstream and downstream of a extrusion. So these operations include preparation,
which  is  either  done  by  conditioning,  formulation,  modification,  cleaning  etc.  before
extrusion and various finishing operation applied to the extrudate after extrusion, which is
nothing but drying, frying, addition of flavouring agents etc. 
So we said extrusion can take care of these processes together or alone, which is nothing but
a  cooking,  sterilization,  drying,  melting  cooling,  texturing,  conveying,  puffing,  mixing
kneading etc., but one should not think that it also includes the upstream and downstream
processing, so they should be carried out separately. So the upstream processing include
conditioning,  formulation,  modification  and  cleaning  and  downstream  processing  or  the
finishing operations, which are applied to the extrudate after extrusion which are nothing but
a drying, frying, addition of flavouring agents, this will be added after the extrudate comes
out of the extrusion process. 
So the next point is extrusion is  a continuous  process. For its  output the extruder  is  a
relatively compact machine because it also does many works together and requires little floor
space and extrusion requires little labour, the extruder is a versatile equipment, the same
equipment with slight modifications may be used for achieving different objectives or for
processing many different products. As we said earlier these many process can be applied
individually or together based on the need for the food material, food material processing. So in that case with the slight modification these extruders can be used to for to achieve any
different objective also to process any different products different products in the sense, so
the same extruder can be used for puffing snacks as well as ready to eat cereals. The food
processing, in the food processing of ready to eat cereals as well as the puffed snacks making
we can use the same extruder and also the same equipment can be used for kneading as well
conching as well. So different operations also can be done and different products also can be
taken care with the single piece of equipment because it has got that kind of versatile in
nature
(Refer Slide Time: 14:41)
And cooking extrusion is a genuine high temperature short term process HTST, so their
retention time in the extruder is relatively short. Consequently, extrusion cooking can be used
for the disinfection and sterilization of the product and for the inactivation of heat resistant
toxins  such  as  aflatoxin.  So  extrusion  also  can  be  used  for  disinfection  as  well  as  a
sterilization of the product and also it inactivates the heat resistant toxins, which is called
aflatoxin.
The energy expenditure of cooking extrusion is usually lower than that of the alternative
processes because major part of the energy heat or mechanical work is delivered to the
product directly and not through an intermediary medium. So this is when compared to heat
exchanger. So when you are melting the solid food particle or the moisturizing solids in the
extrusion cooking, so it is like you are employing less energy expenditure in extrusion when
compared to heat exchanger. First of all, handling high viscous material in heat exchanger is
very much difficult, added to that heat exchanger got solid wall in between two fluids, sowhich adds extra resistance. So here the heat is directly applied. So in that way the energy
expenditure in extrusion cooking is very much lower compared to alternative process. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:14)
And this is the history whatever we have discussed in a few slides earlier the forming or non-
thermal extruder. This was first introduced as a extrusion equipment. So that was used for
pasta then second one the single screw cooking extruder, which was used for dry animal feed
and texturized vegetable protein and ready-to-eat cereal, puffed snacks, pellets, and dry pet
food and after that the twin screw mechanism where included so this were used to moist pet
food, upgrading of raw materials and flat bread, croutons, confectionery chocolate-making
etc. and twin screw with long coolling dye that was used for moist texturized proteins and
refrigerated extruder this is the latest technology ice cream and frozen bars. So these are all
different kind of equipment and their commercial use.(Refer Slide Time: 17:11)
So we are going to see here for single extruder, single screw extruder as well as twin screw
extruder, but not in detail because the extrusion technology in self a vast technology, which is
also applied simultaneously in polymer processing which is called melt extrusion but here we
are going to see what is the basic mechanism and what are all the thermal process or mass
transfer or pressure changes or shear changes involved in, in the process of extrusion cooking
and we also look into some of the physical and chemical effects. 
So this is a single screw extruder so a hollow cylindrical enclosure called a barrel. The barrel
can be smooth or grooved. So if you see here, so this is nothing but a barrel, so this can be
smooth or grooved. A sturdy Archimedean screw or worm with the thick root and shallow
flight, thick root and shallow flight turning inside the barrel. So if you see here, so this isnothing but a screw, so which has got thick root, so this is maybe we call it as a root and this
is nothing but a flight. 
A flights of rotating screw propel the material along a helicoidal channel, which is nothing
but a flow channel formed between the screw root and the barrel, the screw route is this one
and the barrel is this one so when it turns so the floor or food materials forming a helical flow
section in between the barrel and the screw root, so the flights of rotating screw propel the
material along the helicoidal channel formed between the screw route and barrel. So when it
rotates the material also caught in between the helicoidal channel and it also moves forward
from the feed side to end side of the extruder.
The width of the flow channel resulting from the screw pitch is considerably larger than its
thickness. The screw pitch is nothing but the distance between two ply flights, so this is
nothing but a screw pitch. So the width of the screw pitch is larger than its thickness. The gap
between the screw tip and the barrel surfaces made as much as narrow as possible to employ
high compression at the end of the extruder which is near the dye. So this is nothing but a
dye, so which gives a proper shape for the extrudate. So this is a bigger plate anyway we are
going to see what is the use of these materials.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:12)
Restricted pay passage element known as a dye at the exit end of the extruder. So this is what
we have seen here that is nothing but a dye, the functions of the dye are to serve as a
pressure-release valve and to impart to the extrudate the desired shape determined by the
cross-section of the aperture. So as I said earlier, so this dye gives the shape for the extrudate
as  well  as  so  here  when  the  material  is  coming  near  the  beaker  plate  it  has  got  high
compression, high compression in the sense high pressure. So near the dye, it is released the
pressure it acts as a pressure releasing valve. So pressure releasing valve and to impart to the
extrudate the desired shape. The die is sometimes preceded by a perforated plate which is
called a breaker plate. So the function of the breaker plate is nothing but to distribute the
compressed material evenly across the dye. 
So as I said here so the material comes near the breaker plate in the compressed stage, that
means high pressure stage. So the breaker plate distributes them to the dye and a device for
cutting extrudate at emerging from the die but here in this diagram it is not shown. So after it
extrudate comes out of the extruder so there is a cutting mechanism usually It will be a
rotating knife, so that is there. And different kinds of devices for heating and cooling the
barrel. So as I said earlier the melting happens inside the extruder. So to get the melt from the
plastic pellets, why plastic pellets initially extruders were used in the polymer processing I
just told. 
So here food material anyway, we are going to see as in with the examples. So when food
material flows along the extruder the heater melts them and move them forward till the end of
the extruder. So for that reason either it may be a jacket, jacket in the sense, for example here
the different extruders I have put here so here if you see the jacket jacket in the sense singlechannel so through which either hot water or steam will be flowing or you may get here it is
a, so here these are all heater or coolers, we call it as a segmental heaters or segmental
coolers. 
So based on the applications sometimes it is done in the cold, I mean the coolers are also
needed. Sometimes we call it as a cold extrusion one example is there we are going to see, so
you can use it as a segmental heaters or you can use that as a jacket through which heating or
cooling medium can be passed depending upon the application, so different kinds of devices
for cooling and heating which is kept in the barrel. So either it is a in the form of steam or
water jackets electrical resistance heaters, induction heaters. So electrical resistance heat us
your barrel can be bound by the electrical coils as well.
So that kind of mechanism also there, these elements external to the barrel are usually divided
into individual segments, that is what I call it as segmental heaters  in order to impose
different temperature conditions at different sections of the extruder. So for example, I need
initially high temperature and at the end low temperature means this heater can be designed
with  the  higher  voltage  and  this  heater  can  be  designed  with  a  lower  voltage.  So  the
segmental heater advantage is that, so that cannot be done using throughout the jacket in here.
So here the steam or hot water may be flowing with the same temperature. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:29)
A hopper of gravity feeding or auger for positive feeding, so the hopper is this. So this is
nothing but a feeder for the extruder and a ports for the injection of steam, water and other
fluids as needed. So if you have got jacket, then there should be port through which thestimulus employed and measurement instruments, this is very much important flow rate
measurement, temperature measurement, pressure and associated controls. Drive usually with
speed variation capability and torque control also needed. 
So we have got three figures, the first one I have explained so this is the food material, this is
hopper, so this is your screw, screw has got root as well as flights. So the flow channel is
formed into between the barrel and the screw route and segmental heaters are employed in
the barrel then anything we remote and once it starts it starts with the feed section. So
sometimes it is called as a conveying section as well. 
So where there where there your feed, feed food material is conveyed to the next section. So
this is a compression section. So here only the compression starts if you see the screw has
expanded in diameter when it is along the length of the screw along the length of the screw it
has expanded in diameter, the diameter at the end of the screw is higher than the diameter at
the feed. So the flow channel is formed between barrel and the screw root and when you go
near to the end of the extruder this flow channel height or the distance between the barrel and
the screw rate is reducing that is the way it is compressed. 
So the heater which is kept in the surface of the barrel heats the material that is the way melt
is being formed. The second section is compression section. The third one is metering section
that is properly compressed at melted region, and here if you see that this shank, shank is
nothing but a head material here. So this is root this we have told already the melt and the
pictures the distance between two plates and channel is nothing but which was formed in the
between the root and the barrel and barrier flight main flight. 
So if you see here the distance between two flights is higher in the feed section, feed zone but
when you see here in the transition as well as metering zone the distance that is pitch,
between two flights with decreased to give proper compression. So feed section, compression
section, metering section, barrel die. So this we have seen there itself. So here also this
breaker plate distributes the material to the die, die gives proper shape as well as the pressure
releasing. So from the compressed food material, so that is the function of dye and extrudate
once it comes out of the extruder the rotating knife cuts the extrudate based on the shape. (Refer Slide Time: 27:37)
So here what the gear reducer box, so this is operated by the motor so which gives the
rotation to the screw. So otherwise we have seen hopper, throat section, screw, hand barrel
line and barrel heater and cooler and thermo couples for the temperature control and here it is
a filter screen. So before going into breaker plate or distributor plate and there is a adapter so
this is nothing but a die. So which gives the proper shape and this is a distributor plate and
this is adapter the melt temperature to measure the melt temperature the thermo couple is
employed here and feed zone or conveying zone, so this is a melting zone the melt pumping
are metering zone, so that is all about.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:34)
The materials processed in cooker extruders or particulate moist solids as already told and
high viscosity dough like fluids. So it is the viscosity of the material is so high and as the
screw rotates the flights drag the material toward the exit. So this what we have told so this is
the screw so this is your flight so when it rotates so it drags the material toward the exit of the
extruder. The flow channel described above is delimited by two solid surfaces, one is, another
one is the screw root. The friction with the moving material occurs on both the surfaces, so
this normal phenomenon.
So you have a you have got a barrel, this is your screw, so the material is cut in between so
when the material is flowing along the barrel surface as well as in the screw surface, so there
is a friction, right. Ideally friction at the barrel surface should be the stronger of the two,
because the screw is rotating here, so the friction produced by the barrel should be stronger
for internal shear to occur but where the friction weak at the barrel surface for example as a
result of lubrication and the strong at the screw surface the material would stick to the screw
and turn with it without shear and without forward movement.
So what it is told, when the material is caught between the barrel and the screw, so the
friction is generated in both the surfaces, so ideal condition, the barrel friction should be
higher and stronger in order to move the food material further near to the end of the extruder
but what may so happen is, the friction generated in the barrel may be weaker due to many
reason. One such reason is lubrication and also here when we discuss about the single screw
so we also told one condition it may be of smooth surface or grooved.If it is a smooth surface, then the friction may not be that stronger in the barrel. So in that
case if my screw got stronger friction the material stick to the screw instead of forward
movement, it rotates along with the screw. So that is the condition happens when barrel but
low or weak friction compared to screw. Grooving helps reducing slippage at the barrel
surface,  so  that  is  why your barrel’s surface  should  be  grooved  to  avoid  such  kind of
situations. Such kind of situation is here is, the food material tend to stick to the screw and try
to rotate instead of moving forward.
So screw configuration is such that the flow area along the flow channel is progressively
reduce this I have told you because the screw got increase in diameter along the length of the
extruder so that way your flow channel between barrel and screw gets reduced. The material
is  progressively  compressed  as  it  moved  down  the  barrel  so  when  the  place  is  getting
reduced, so it is compressed more the compression ratio is the ratio of cross sectional area of
the flow channel at the feed end and at the exit end between the feed and exit end. So the
reduction in cross sectional area is nothing but a compression ratio.
Reduction of the flow area can be achieved by several types of screw configuration. So that is
what here it is shown, one is tapered screw root. So that is what we have seen in all those
three figures. So it has got increase in diameter, that is the way the distance between the
barrel and the screw root is getting reduced. So that is one kind of compression. The second
kind of compression is pitch screw pitch is reduced along the flow length, along the length of
the extruder.
So in that way also by decreasing screw pitch, you can create the compression and another is
tapered barrel, but this is not common normally because the normal design or industrially
apply design is the barrel got parallel plates only the screw can be tapered or screw pitch can
be reduced but this design is also there but not largely used in the industrial purpose. The
most common or the property decreasing screw pitch and the progressively increasing root or
core diameter the screw configurations corresponding to compression ratios between two and
four are common and the pressure developed in the cooking extruder can be in the order of
few mega Pascal. (Refer Slide Time: 33:37)
So the sections wise one is feed section. So the main function of this section is to act as a
screw conveyor. So it just conveying the feed material from the feed end into the exit end of
the extruder transporting material from feed entrance to the subsequent sections, sorry, it is a
subsequent section, it is not end so it is conveying material from the feed inlet to the next
section, which is nothing but a transition section. Also no compression or modification of the
mass occurs in the section. So no heat is employed in the food material and no melting or no
mass change. So only it conveys the food material from the feed section to the transition
section. In the transition section the material is compressed and heated.
In the metering section so the melting happens, texturization, kneading, chemical reactions
etc. happens through shear and mixing in metering section. Through the friction used for
turning the screw top is dissipated into the material as a heat. So as I said here we are using
the shaft mechanism so here using the thrust bearings, so we are giving the rotation to the
screw. So whatever power you are giving here due to the friction there is a dissipation
happens. So the screw shaft is dissipated into the material as a heat. Due do friction the heat
is generated, so the power you are given to rotate the shaft is dissipated as a heat.
The portion of the heat delivered to the product is generated in situ. So we have employed the
segmental heaters or jackets to heat the material or melt the material but some of the heat also
generated in situ from the power which is given for turning the screw shaft, heat is also
transferred from the externally heated barrel surface and supplied by direct injection of the
livestream. So this we have discussed either segmental heaters or by jackets in which the livestream is flowing. In single screw extruders, the internally generated heat constituents are
major part of the energy input, consequently the heating is rapid in the cooking extruder.
So it is not only melting is happening by the segmental heaters employed in the barrel surface
or the heating medium employed through the jackets. The sum of the heat is being employed
to the material by the heat which is generated from the friction which is coming from
dissipation of the power given to the screw shaft. In such cases the heating is very rapid in the
cooking extruder because it is not depending upon the external heating medium. It itself
generates the heat and melts the product. 
(Refer Slide Time: 36:47)
Because  of  high  pressure  in  the  extruder  the  moist  material  can  be  heated  up  to  the
temperature of 180 to 200 when the pressure is suddenly released at the exit of the die the
some of the water in the product is flash evaporated and as a result the product is puffed. So
this particular mechanism also we have seen whenever the pressure is reduced the water is
getting flash evaporated. So in that case the product became puff, the product will be swollen,
but if you want to pellet size material or product, so this should be avoided.
So this is this should be avoided when you need a pallet. So if you need your products in the
form of pellets form so this should be avoided. So the degree of puffing can be controlled by
releasing some of the pressure and cooling the mass at the last section of the extruder before
the die. So, for example, what they were saying is this is the length and this is pressure. So
we have got three sections, one is conveying section, so then the transition section, so here
the also pressure is increase.So then there may be a venting section where the pressure will be reduced then further it is
conveyed and in the compression section the pressure maybe increase. So in that way so if I
went some of the pressure controlled by releasing some of the pressure cooling the mass at
the last section of the extruder we can avoid this puffing, when you need a pellet size material
at the end of the extruder, as a result of compression, your pressure gradient is built in the
opposite direction to the average moment of the mass. So what we told in the extruder the
feed is fed in the hopper.
So in the conveying section, it is conveyed to the transition section, in transition section the
pressure and temperature of the fluid will be increased and in the metering section, the melt is
formed and compressed and further compressed before going in to die to get the proper shape
but as we told the compression is increased along the length so it is creating a pressure
gradient opposite to the direction of the average movement of the mass. So that means so
your end of the extruder the pressure is high near the inlet the pressure is low automatically
backflow happens. 
(Refer Slide Time: 39:27)
The flow along the continuous flow channel contains two components. So normally which
also helps mixing in the single extruder, one is drag flow from the feed end to the die end
caused by the mechanical thrust of the screw flights. So we already told when the screw is
rotating the material is get caught between the barrel and screw root surface and that is the
way it is moving forward near to the die but at the same time the pressure driven back flow in
the opposite direction caused by the pressure difference between the two extremities of the
extruder so at the end of the extruder, pressure is high and the inlet of the extruder thepressure is low, so because of that some backflow also happens. So forward movement is also
there, backward movement of the fluid is also there. 
The net flow rate is the difference between the flow rates associated with the two velocity
field; one is due to drag flow another is due to back flow. The intensity of back flow and
hence the pumping efficiency of the extruder depends upon the resistance of the die and other
restrictions placed on the flow path. The intensity of the back flow and hence the pumping
efficiency, pumping efficiency in the sense, so taking the material or metering at the end of
the near the end of the extruder. So that is depends on the resistance of the die because this
causes the further resistance to the flow and other restrictions placed on the flow part. 
(Refer Slide Time: 41:07)
So this is simple modelling. But remember so this here we are going to see the volume
throughput  of  the  single  screw  extruder.  So  here  this  model  is  done  based  on  certain
assumptions. So one has to be very careful when you use this model as I said in membrane
separation  lecture  itself.  So there  also  be used  to Darcy model,  (()) (41:21) model.  So
everything has got certain assumptions, so remember when these models were used those
assumptions should be kept in mind. So here what we did, so here I have a barrel surface, so
here is my screw so in between my flow channel, so the screw is also rotating. In between my
fluid our food particles get caught.
So this we call it as a flow channel. So this flow channel is filled and kept as a rectangular
channel, rectangular channel in the sense, for example, you have got a cylindrical section, so
if you cut it here, so what you make is the rectangular thing, so this is nothing but you are z.So the z becomes height here. So this see this is your, the radius or diameter. So the diameter
becomes the length here, so that is what we have done here, so we made it as a rectangular
channel. So this has got three velocity components one along the length and another along the
width and another along the height the one along the height we are not taking into account
here.
The total velocity is nothing but a pie DN and so pie D is the circumference so N is nothing
but a number of rotations. So when you got two components one is pie DN sin theta which is
nothing but a Vx, the (Vu) Vz is nothing but pie DN cos theta so when you come and apply in
the volumetric throughput, so this is nothing but a volumetric flow rate so meter cube per
second or hour, so which is nothing but a velocity meter per hour into area, so which is
nothing but meter square, so meter cube per hour, so this is due to drag flow, drag flow, so
which is nothing but Vz WH upon 2. The second one is due to backflow, back flow is
happening due to pressure gradient.
The pressure gradient is dP upon dz, z is along the length, dd a set of nothing but pressure
gradient. That means P2 minus P1 divided by length. So this P2 is nothing but pressure at the
end of the extruder, P1 is at the feed side. So the length is nothing but length of the extruder,
WH cube upon 12 mu, mu is nothing but the resistance which is nothing but a viscosity here,
W is width of the flow channel, H is nothing but a height of the flow channel. So your final
equation looks like pie DN cos theta, Vz is it is here by DN cos theta WH upon 2. So why
this minus, this minus because so drag flow plus back flow, but backflow happens in the
opposite to the forward movement of the food material. So because of that it is a minus W H
cube divided by 12 mu, mu is nothing but a viscosity of the material P2 minus P1 upon L. (Refer Slide Time: 44:36)
So throughput due to drag is proportional to the tip diameter of the screw. This is nothing but
a capital D and the speed of rotation, revolution or rotation, which is N and to the cross
sectional area of the flow channel, which is nothing but WH by 2, so that is due to drag
because we have seen Vz WH upon 2. Backflow is inversely proportional to the viscosity of
the mass because for this contribution, WH cube 12 mu into P2 minus P1 upon L.So in that
case, so this is inversely proportional to the viscosity of the mass. In case of high viscosity
melts so if the viscosity is high, so this term will be very much low, so in that case you can
directly calculate Q as a Vz WH upon 2 because the viscosity is high this term got very less
weightage in the Q so you can go by Q is equal to Vz WH upon 2. 
Evolution of the effect of extruder geometry and operating conditions on the extruder but not
for the design purpose, this I have already told so you cannot design a extruded based on this
particular formula, so it can be used to check the effect of extruded geometry. For example, if
increase the theta, theta is nothing but here the flight angle. So angle between the flight or
you can call it as a screw angle. So if I increase the length of the extruder what happens, the
comparative study you can do or you can check the operating conditions. 
For example, in this particular extruder how much of the material can be fed. So these thing
you can use this equation and calculate, but not for the design purpose because it has got its
own assumptions. The one of the assumption is Non-Newtonian fluids and the apparent
viscosity can be represented by simple models such as power law. So here we are still using
mu, mu is nothing but a Newtonian fluid viscosity, Newtonian flow viscosity, but most of thefood material and also we told and especially for extruder we use for high viscosity food
material.
So most of the food materials are Non-Newtonian fluid. So in the Non-Newtonian fluid if you
remember our earlier classes, we use apparent viscosity, which is nothing but eta, so this is
called apparent viscosity. So apparent viscosity is nothing but a function of velocity gradient,
flow behaviour index and flow consistency index. So here we are still using mu so that is not
correct and the assumption of constant cross sectional area of the flow channel. So we are
considering constant cross sectional area, we our self know the cross sectional area decreases
when the material is passed from feed side to extruder end but here we are considering the
assumption of constant cross sectional area. 
In single screw extruders the portion of the mechanical power used to for building pressure
and for pushing the mass through die represent at most 28 percentage. So this means this we
have seen so whatever the power we are giving for the screw to rotate that is nothing but a
mechanical power used for building pressure and pushing the mass through the die represent
almost to 28 percentage. So the remaining is dissipating as a heat. So that is why the single
screw extruders the heating is very much rapid, almost a 72 percentage of the power given
through the extruder is dissipating as a heat. 
(Refer Slide Time: 49:06)
So this is a twin screw extruder so if you see so this is one particular screw, this is another
screw, pair of parallel screws rotating inside the barrel so instead of one with an 8 shaped
cross section. So this is your barrel, so you got two screws together, so this got, so if you seethe side view so you will see like a 8 shaped cross section. At the exit end each of the half of
the barrel convert into a short conical section each with a die at the apex. So if you see in the
single screw extruder, so it also got the final conical section. So this is the employed for both
the screws, this way the screw is tapered in both the screws. 
The screws can be co-rotating and counter rotating so that means so both screws can be co-
rotating in the same direction, or one screw rotates in this way and another screw rotates in
this way, counter rotating as well. The two screws are closely intermeshed so you can see
here and in some models the barrel is split into two halves longitudinally allowing freeing the
screws, inspection and cleaning. So this has got many design. So I request you to refer some
of the books if you want to get in detail or if you are working particularly in extrusion
technology. So here we are not discussing much depth about the each equipment. So in one of
the models the barrel itself, there it is a cylindrical barrel. So here the barrel itself a half half
of the barrel. So once for the cleaning what it has been done is so half of the barrel can be
removed and the screw is taken out and cleaned for proper cleaning. So that is what it is to
halves longitudinally allowing freeing the screws inspection and cleaning.
(Refer Slide Time: 51:33)
In other models the barrel consists of short and separable modules. So for example, so this is
one kind of barrel and this is another kind of barrel. So this is module wise, so you can easily
remove and clean and most of the material transport occurs in the C-shaped chambers formed
between the screw, so that means so you have got one screw here the other screw here, so in
that case so your material is get caught between the C-section. So or you can see probably
here, so this is what they call it as a C-section. So your material is get caught in the C-section.The slippage or friction on the barrel surfaces less relevant here so that is not even taken into
consideration because that is taking care by the intermeshed screws because why we are
thinking about slippage or friction is the fluid or the food material is sticking to the screw and
it is not having a forward moment but here the material is get caught in between the screws
and both screws are rotating so this is less relevant and conveying section extending over the
major  part of the  screw  length  acts  as  a heated  screw  conveyor  in  case of twin-screw
relatively high axial velocity forward compared to single screw extruder, heating occurs as a
result of heat transfer from the barrel surface itself heated externally. 
So since you have a two screws that means twin screw, so you are whatever the pumping
power you are applying so that will be consumed by the two twin screw compared to single
screw. So in that case the dissipation of the mechanical power given to the screw will be
reduced in this twin screw extruder combination in that way you supposed to employ more
heat to the product using either segmental heaters, which is placed in the barrel or using a
jacketed vessel with the proper heating medium. So that is what it is told. 
Pressurization is achieved at the melt pumping or metering section with the help of flow
restriction elements included in the configuration. The filling ratio in the second section
increases gradually toward the die region, so that heat transfer wise here we told the heating
occurs as a result of heat transfer from the barrel surface itself heated externally because the
amount of pumping power we were given is consumed by the twin screw. So in that case the
dissipation also less so the heating to be employed externally and pressurization is achieved
at the melt pumping or metering section.
So this is common for both single extruder as well as the twin screw but if you see there is a
section called transition section. So the transition section your pressure is increased, your
temperature is increased but here the pressurization is achieved at the melt pumping or
metering section, that is the third section with the help of flow restriction elements included
in configuration. The filling ratio in the second section increases gradually toward the die
region.  So  the  conveying  section  we  told  it  is  so  extended  over  the  screw  length  and
pressurization is happening at the metering or melt pumping section. (Refer Slide Time: 54:47)
So advantages of twin screw extruder over the single screw extruder is mixing is more
efficient and heat exchange because of twin-screw heat exchange rate from barrel surface to
the material is faster that we know and more uniform because of twin screw mechanism.
Residence time is more uniformly distributed because no residue stick to the screw because
both the screws were rotating. High moisture sticky materials can be handled, so this sticky
material sometimes problem when you handle in the single screw extruder, we told why it is
because sometimes it gets stick into the screw and rotating instead of forward movement,
most important advantage of twin screw extruders is it enables processing of materials, that
could not be handled  hitherto  by single screw extruders. So that  is  nothing but a high
moisture sticky materials. (Refer Slide Time: 55:47)
So then twin screw extruder the more advantage is self-wiping, reduces the risk of residue
build-up and self wiping is nothing but one is wiped using other screw the whatever the
material sticking into one screw is wiped by the another screw itself. So which reduces the
risk of residue build-up and feeding problems with cohesive materials are less serious. So
handling these cohesive materials are less serious in twin screw and a disadvantage wise
these are higher cost because the capital expenditure and the operation costs are higher
because of twin screw mechanism and twin screw is mechanically more complex and less
robust  consequently  the  mission  is  more  sensitive  to  mechanical  abuse.  So  that  is  the
complexity in handling when screw extruder.(Refer Slide Time: 57:02)
So for this lecture this is the references and additional resources and the figures what we have
shown single screw extruder taken from this particular book, and otherwise, the material is
taken from Berk, Zeki, and some of the points are also taken from Fellows and Richardson.
Thank you.