Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi 
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
Biocomposite/ Bionanocomposite Materials for Food
Packing Applications
Good  morning  everybody.  So,  today  we  are  going  to  discuss  about  biocomposite  and
bionanocomposite materials for food packing applications. So, as far as this lecture is concern
so  this  is  again  the  recent  topic.  And  there  were  many  polymer  and  filler  materials
combination have been tried and the literature of research is very vast. 
So, here we are going to discuss about main entry cases involved in making such materials.
And what are all the needs all those things we are going to discuss and whenever needed we
are going to take some example bionanocomposite food packaging films or materials. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:29)
So, just a recap about previous class. So, in the previous class we have mainly discussed
about transport properties or we call it as a barrier properties. So, for penetrant and barrier
combination. So, we normally we say this is the packaging material. So and penetrant is most
of the time it may be a water vapor and gases so example is O2 CO2 etc. 
So, in this in the packaging material we have discussed main category metals, metal cans and
another one is glass materials, another is polymeric materials so that is most widely used now
a days and another one is paper materials. And the transport wise they are good barriers both metals and glasses are good barriers but
paper and polymeric materials where have various degrees of permeability. So, which helps
us to use based on the various applications we can change the degree of permeability based
on the needs as well. So, that is where this films are this polymeric films and paper materials
are widely used. Where we need to have certain control over the barrier properties. 
So, the moment we talk about the permeability, so we have seen one formula which JG, so
this is nothing but a flux of a gas component through the film. So, which is nothing but pi
into P2 minus P1 upon Z. So, this is nothing but a thickness, so this is nothing but a pressure
gradient which outside and inside the packaging, pressure gradient inside the packaging and
outside environment. So, this is the permeability, so which has got two component in it. So,
one is DG which is nothing but diffusivity and another SG which is nothing but solubility. 
So, this we derived based on simple henrys and fix law of diffusion. So, this is the properties
to be looked into when we talk about the permeability and based on this DG and SG, so we
already told that the concentration of penetrant is not depending upon the DG and SG. And
sometimes what happens it also takes part in the changing properties of the films. Sometimes
when we use condensable vapors or liquids. So, there may be a chance for the swelling of the
film and also we have seen there are two things one is the LDPE, so which is nothing but low
density poly ethylene and PVOH poly venial alcohol. 
So, this is got low permeability or good barrier property against water. But it has got low
barrier against the R may be it was the permeability of oxygen through LDPE was high
permeability of oxygen. So, for PVOH it is opposite to this particular property. So, when we
have certain materials one is low permeability against a water or it may be good barrier
against the water and another one is high permeability against the oxygen. 
So, that means it is a poor barrier against the oxygen. So and PVOH exactly got opposite to
this so the concept came like. So, how do these two materials can be combined together. It is
not exactly this LDPE and PVOH likewise materials, one has got good property in one
particular aspect another got good properties in particular aspect. How do these two materials
can be combined together to achieve the purpose of both the advantages and remove if any
disadvantages. 
For example, in this case I want to have good barrier against water vapor as well as oxygen.
How two materials of this category can be combined together to serve the purpose. So, that is
why the composite materials came into existence. So, along with this we have also seen themechanical properties obviously metals and glasses got good mechanical properties. And
metals when we see the size and shape and also thickness of the metals are important to have
good mechanical property.
If we take glass one problem with that is handling and also we need specialized equipment to
handle the glass packaging materials. And polymer and paper we have the problem with
moisture, so it is not having a good barrier against moisture. So, because of moisture content
this  mechanical  property  of the  paper  may  be affected.  So, this  are  all  few  points  we
discussed  about  the  mechanical  properties  and  also  apart  from  that  there  are  chemical
reactivity. 
Chemical reactivity in the sense for example metals we have discuss about tin plate. Tin plate
is nothing but a steel plate which is coated with the tin so, if the coating is not proper if there
are any porous structure in the coating. So, there may be a chance for contamination and also
when we take acid foods or when we handle acid foods in metal packaging. So, we need to be
careful about again the contamination. 
And also sometimes what happens the depolarizing agents such as we discussed in over
nutraceuticals, the phytochemical called anthocyanin. So, that particular chemical is good
depolarizing agent. So, such materials are handle with metals, so there may be chance for
corrosion. And also in earlier thermal processing lectures we have also discussed about the
removing  oxygen  inside  the  packaging.  And  also  we  discussed  about  the  head  space
maintenance to have a vacuum. 
So, this also come into the property when we discuss about the properties  because the
chemical reactivity is also important. So, now we are going to see so how do we combine
materials  which  has  got  good  properties  or  better  properties  together  to  enhance  the
performance of the packaging material. (Refer Slide Time: 10:18)
So, the first one is biopolymers. So, composite material we understood, so we are going to
see nanocomposites and bionanocomposites. So, before that we start with biopolymers. The
biopolymers are nothing but bio based materials usually called as environment friendly and
biodegradable and earth friendly. So, that means when we throw it into the environment it
should  not  create  any  further  environmental  problem.  So,  biodegradable  plastics  under
appropriate conditions of moisture temperature and oxygen availability lead to fragmentation
or disintegration of the plastics with no toxic or environmentally harmful residue.
So, one problem with normal plastic is this, first one is it takes long time to disintegrate even
if it disintegrate it leaves the toxic chemicals or environmentally harmful chemicals to the
environment. So, biopolymers are one so which needs appropriate conditions of moisture
temperature and oxygen availability but even upon disintegration so it will not lead to any
toxic or harmful residue. 
So, the classification group 1, group 2, group 3. The group 1 contains extracted polymers, so
which are directly extracted or removed from the biomass, examples are all polysaccharides
films, charged cellulose and proteins based and polypeptides and polynucleotides all are
group 1 or extracted polymers. Group 2 are synthesized polymers so they are produced by
classical chemical synthesis using renewable bio based monomers or mixed source of bio
based as well as petroleum. It is not pure bio polymer. 
So, either we use chemical synthesis using bio based materials or in the raw materials itself
along with bio based material there may be petroleum products as well. So, example is
polylactic acid and bio polyester.The  third  one  is  microbiologically  transformed  polymers.  So,  they  are  produced  by
microorganism or genetically modified bacteria. So, examples are PHB polyhydroxybutyrate
and  bacterial  cellulose,  xanthan,  curdian  and  pullan.  So,  these  are  microbiologically
transformed polymers. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:48)
So, the next is what is the market for this bio polymers? Bio polymers are nothing but
biodegradable materials. So, they account for nearly 60 percentage of the market but in
Europe. So, that is the highest one among the world and biopolymers are based on renewable
raw materials which can be processed by injection or blow molding or blown or cast film
extrusion. So, this we know by now and extrusion pure extrusion itself. So, otherwise it can
be casting technique also we can be used to produce the film or cast film extrusion or
extrusion alone.
The components cellulose, starch or oils from plant based biomaterials are nothing but corn
rapeseed and soybean can be extracted. So, this can be called as a extracted polymers. Gelatin
can  be  extracted  from  animal  skin  and  whey  protein  from  milk.  And  the  compostable
polymers are biodegraded in an industrial composting environment. So, certain biopolymers
we cannot say they are bio degradable. So, biodegradable in the sense when you throw in the
environment it itself should be disintegrated or fragmented. 
So, whatever may be the environmental conditions but here the compostable polymers are
biodegraded in an industrial composting environment. So, that means we are maintaining the
moisture level and temperature and oxygen. So, define the temperature of about 60 degree a
defined humidity and presence of microorganism as well as oxygen level in fewer than 180days. So, here the composting, composting means we are maintaining a industrial composting
environment which is defined as about temperature of about 60 degree and with defined
humidity and presence of microorganism to disintegrate fewer than 180 days.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:05)
So, do not leave fragments longer than approximately 12 weeks. So, 12 weeks in the residue
and do not contain any metals or toxins and do support plant life. So, even though it is
biodegraded in the industrially composting environment. So, they do not contain any metals
or toxins after they degraded. And also they support plant life. So, example is polylactide
which is nothing but a PLA polylactic acid which is typically manufactured from cornstarch,
cornstarch is the bio source from which the PLA is produced. 
So, this polylactides are water resistant and can be formed by injection molding or blowing or
vacuum forming at room temperature and when they have to be degraded we suppose to
maintain an industrial composting environment. So, PLA cannot be degraded on its own. 
Then polypropylene carbonate PPC, which is a biodegradable aliphatic polyester reinforced
with  starch.  So,  PPC  is  reinforced  with  the  starch.  So,  this  incorporation  of  low  cost
biodegradable  cornstarch  into  PPC  provides  a  practical  way  to  produce  a  completely
biodegradable and cost competitive composite with good mechanical properties. 
So, now we are slowly introducing how do we combine two materials to achieve specific
purpose. So, in that we PPC polypropylene carbonate is reinforced with the starch material.
So, addition of starch material into PPC reduce the cost as well as the biodegradable cornstarch  into  PPC  provides  a  biodegradable  nature  for  the  PPC  and  also  it  gives  good
mechanical properties. So, this can be called as biocomposite material. 
So, then next one is improvement in thermal properties of PPC has been reported by mixing
PPC with montmorillonite clay to form a bio nanocomposite. So, next one we are introducing
is  a bionanocomposite.  So, the  biodegradable  nature  when  they  are  introduced  into the
composite material by combining two materials those are called bio composite material. 
So, the same PPC can be mixed with the montmorillonite clay, so which is nothing but a nano
clay. So, now one dimension we got in terms of nanomaterial. So, when this nanomaterial is
added into this biocomposite material it is called bio nanocomposite material. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:03)
So, what is nanocomposites, nanotechnology presents exiting new products with enhanced
fundamentally different performance properties, so all because it increases the surface area.
So, when you go more into smaller and smaller you get good surface area more, so that is
why your functional properties are improved. 
So, this introduction of nanotechnology in this composite materials area paved a way to new
exiting products and it exhibits biocompatibility, compatibility means between two materials
and biodegradability, natural degradation and controlled release capacity of antimicrobial
agent  if  any  and  control  release  capacity  of  antimicrobial  agent  if  they  are  added  and
controlled release capacity of antioxidant if they are added. 
So,  it  contains  a  naturally  occurring  polymer  which  is  nothing  but  a  bio  polymer  in
combination with an inorganic moiety, inorganic moiety is nothing but our nano clay to be
functionalized including at least one dimension on the nanometer scale. So, it contains a
naturally occurring polymer which is called biopolymer in combination with an inorganic
moiety, so which is nothing but what we used here to improve the property of thermal
property of PPC is nothing but montmorillonite clay. So, which is nothing but a nano clay. 
So, the nanoclay is included in the bio polymer to as an inorganic moiety to functionalize
them. So, in the inorganic moiety order here is having a nano scale dimension, so that is why
it is called bio nanocomposite. 
So,  challenges  and  compatibility  between  clays  and  polymers  and  reaching  complete
dispersion of nanoplates, so that is nothing but we call it as a exfoliation. So, this is what the
challenging part here. So, it is not like I mix the two materials, so we cannot always expect
we mixed two different property materials but they will combine together or dispersed with
high degree and give always better property. So, that may not be true in all cases. 
So, challenge here is how I reliably or how the degree of mixing between these two materials
can be enhanced. So, that is what we call it as a exfoliation. Exfoliation is the final target. So,
exfoliation means proper mixing of this inorganic moieties with the polymers. So, how to
reach  that  challenge  or  how  to  reach  that  end  goal  is  a  challenge  in  making  bio
nanocomposite material for food packaging applications.(Refer Slide Time: 21:09)
So, this is the montmorillonite structure. So, you have got oxygen, hydroxyls, aluminum iron
and magnesium, silicon or occasionally aluminum. So, this silicon or aluminum which gives
the tetrahedral structure. So, here also you will get tetrahedral. So and in between so you have
got aluminum, so which gives octahedral. So, here in the next slide we will see in detail. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:50)
So, here you have got tetrahedral, so in between you have octahedral, so again you have
tetrahedral and in between you have got exchangeable cations to have proper molecular
attraction and OH I talked about O I told here, so this exchangeable cations are nothing but
lithium, sodium, rubidium, cesium. And here so this dimension is about 1 nanometer. And
this is something called basal spacing. So, basal spacing is nothing but distance from a certain
plane in one layer to the corresponding plane in another parallel layer of the crystal. 
So, this is the plane, so distance from certain plane in a one layer, so this particular layer to
the corresponding plane, so this is another corresponding plan so till then. So, the distance
from a certain plane in one layer to the corresponding plane in the another parallel layer of
the crystal is nothing but a basal spacing, so which is includes features of the geometry of
stacking of layers. So, here if you see this particular layer you got a three stacks, one is
tetrahedral, octahedral as well as one more tetrahedral. 
So, which includes stacking layers as well as any material present between the layers. So,
here we have lot of material present between the layers so this is called basal spacing. So,
why we are talking about here, so here we said that the challenges in compatibility between
the clay and polymer and reaching complete dispersion is a challenge. So, we have seen
about the montmorillonite structure bit not in the detail but what are all there and what is
called basal spacing what is it dimension etcetera.(Refer Slide Time: 23:48)
So, now we are going to see, so how this composite morphology can be. So, before reaching
the state of exfoliated nano composites, so there are other composite morphology as well, one
is micro composite another one is intercalated nanocomposites and final one is nothing but
exfoliated nanocomposites. Micro nanocomposites they are here. The polymer molecules are
unable to penetrate into the galleries between the layers. So, here the polymer molecules
cannot penetrate galleries between the layers of the nanoclay. 
So, the d spacing, d spacing is nothing but distance between plane atoms that give rise to
diffraction peaks in XRD. So, the d spacing of the layer structure remains nearly identical so
there is no change in d spacing. So, they still remain in the pristine state. So, the properties
therefore remain the same as traditional micro composite. So, if you see micro composites, so
you are just mixing nanoclay with the polymeric materials but you will not see any mixing
between the polymer as well as nonoclay composites or nanoclay materials and the properties
also same it is just that I just brought two materials together. 
The  second  one  is  most  of  the  researchers’  report  which  is  nothing  but  intercalated
nanocomposites. When several polymer chains are inserted between inter layers. So, that
means the layers between the nanoclay material and intercalated structures are formed. So,
that is the way intercalated structures are formed. So, they are the d spacing is also expended
between two layers but only a limited extent usually in the order of 20 to 80 angstrom. (Refer Slide Time: 25:40)
 So, the last one is nothing but a exfoliated nanocomposites. So, if you see here you will
better  understand.  So,  here  you  have  a  layer  silicate,  so  which  is  nothing  but  kind  of
nanoclay. So, here you have a polymer material, so this is nothing but your micro composite.
So, here your polymer could not enter into the space between two layers. So, the nanoclay
property whatever property it got it will be same and whatever property polymeric material
have so that also will be same. There would not be any property change upon mixing.
So, the second one is nothing but intercalated composites and also remember if layer silicates
are in nano range you can say them as a nanocomposite as well. So, here if you see that d
spacing is bit increased so this is what we said that so 20 to 80 angstrom. level. So, this also
has got in between micro composites and this one is nothing but exfoliated composites, sothis is the ultimate one. So, the d spacing is increased and also your polymer could penetrate
through the inter space layers. 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:16)
So, individual nano meter thick layers suspended in a polymeric matrix and are as a result of
extensive penetration of the polymer and the delamination of the layer structure. So, if you
see compare to intercalated structures, so here the d spacing is also improved and also the
polymer could go inside the layered silicate. So, delamination of the layer structure also
happen the d spacing between layers is significantly expanded beyond which the interaction
forces between layer structures diminish. 
So, here also it is expanded beyond which the interaction forces between the layer structures
diminish. So, if it extend beyond this exfoliation then there would not be any interactionforces between the layer structures as well. So, it is extended to that particular level. And the
separation distance between the layers is typically 10 nanometer or more apart. Morphology
is expected to lead dramatic improvements in the nanocomposite properties with a much
lower required loading of fillers than traditional composites. 
Micro  composites  as  we  already  told  there  is  now  property  change.  So,  compare  to
intercalated composites, so this exfoliated nano composites have dramatic improvements in
the property and also if the property improvement is very high, so then there may not be
required high amount of fillers or high amount of layers silicate we may not be required to
increase the property. So, this is what micro composites and intercalated nanocomposites as
well as exfoliated nanocomposites. 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:04)
So, then this figure also taken from the same article so which shows the TEM micrograph of
commercial nylon 6 and MMT, MMT is nothing but the same nanoclay. So, nanocomposites
from Ube industry. So, you can clearly see about your the layered structure in the polymer.
So, this figure shows better exfoliated nanocomposite structure or morphology. (Refer Slide Time: 29:36)
So, nanocomposites what are all those nano scale size fillers are used as montmorillonite and
kaolinite clays and crumpled graphite nanosheets also can be used. So, this shows improved
mechanical strength, thermal stability, gas barrier property, physico chemical properties and
recyclability. And here one thing we need to also remember is so since we used a nanoclay.
So, we need to be extra careful because this are going as a food packaging material. So, these
nanoscale fillers what we used should not be harm to the food and also when we throw into
atmosphere, so you should not create any environmental pollution. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:22)
So, example is cellulose nanofibers and glycerol as a plasticizer to improve the mechanical
and water vapor barrier properties of edible chitosan films. There is a research report. So, inthe research report it says that so in the edible chitosan films, the cellulose nanofiber as a
nanomaterial and glycerol as a plasticizer added to improve the mechanical and water barrier
properties. So, here it is plasticizer and this is a nanomaterial or we call it as a filler and this is
nothing but a bio material. 
So, this combination, in the biomaterial the nanomaterial is added as a fillers and to improve
the plasticizing effect glycerol is added as a plasticizer. So, from this research report it was
reported that so it improves the mechanical and water vapor barrier properties of the chitosan
film.  Obliviously,  when  we  add  the  fillers  so  it  acts  as  a  good  barrier  and  when  the
crystallinity is improved your mechanical property also would improve. 
More compatible filler polymer system, so that means the nano material as a filler and bio
polymer as a polymer system better processing technology and better processing in the sense
how effectively we mixed both of them to get the exfoliated structure. And system approach
to design of polymer plasticizer and filler. So, this is what we call it as a bio nanocomposite
material for food packaging application. 
Polymer,  plasticizer  and  filler  system.  So,  how  effectively  we  design  such  a  polymer
plasticizer and filler system depends upon the compatibility between the filler and polymer
system and how do we process that, so all together contribute to better polymer plasticizer
fillers bio nanocomposite material. 
Concerns over the long term fate and disposal of these material, this I expressed already
which might then lead to the release of nanoparticles into the environment and back into the
food chain raising debate on the labeling approval traceability and regulation of these smart
and intelligent biomaterials. So, this is another concern we need to be careful about. 
So, how it is going to be impacting the environment and also it is going back to the food
chain.  So,  which  raises  the  debate  how  good  it  is  to  use  this  smart  and  intelligent
biomaterials.(Refer Slide Time: 33:10)
So,  then  the  next  one  is  so  these  polymer  filler  and  plasticizing  composites  or
nanocomposites can be used as a food packaging material. So, this is called active packaging
so  which  solves  the  following  purpose  because  it  interacts  between  the  food  and  the
packaging material and also internal gaseous atmosphere. So, that we talked about in water
vapor and gas barrier properties. 
So,  this  active  packaging  technologies  involve  interactions  between  the  food  and  the
packaging material and internal gaseous atmosphere, so it interact with all of them. So, this
has got one of these functions, one is oxygen or carbon dioxide scavengers and sometimes as
an ethylene scavengers and antimicrobial component releases and ethanol emitters, moisture
absorbers, flavor or odor absorbers. 
So, this all together, if these functions are incorporated in the packaging material, so it serves
as the active packing material. So, apart from this active packaging material. So, we have also
got certain things discussed in the last class itself but still I would like to remind you.
So, there are something called controlled atmosphere packaging and modified atmosphere
packaging. So, this we call it as a CAP so this is MAP and active packaging system so that is
what we are discussing now and there are something called intelligent packaging system. So,
this controlled atmosphere packaging system which involves the controlled atmosphere inside
the packaging itself. 
So, this is most of the time will create a problem for example if the packaging material has
got certain permeability to the water vapor or any condensable vapors or liquid or gasses, sothen your controlled atmosphere inside the packaging material whatever we have designed
may get change and also if there are any respiration activity so that also this controlled
atmosphere packaging can be altered during the packaging or during storage and distribution. 
During storage and distribution the package atmosphere the controlled atmosphere may get
change when there is any respiration or there may be a permeation of water vapor or other
gasses through the packaging material. So, after realizing that fact then it put under modified
atmosphere packaging itself. 
So,  the  modified  atmosphere  packaging  is  nothing  but  so  based  on  the  packaging
permeability and based on the food packaging or food material respiration activity, so the
atmosphere inside the package can be modified based on the rate what we wanted and also
for example if we wanted to store it for 30 days. So, accordingly the atmosphere inside the
packaging can be or inside the packaging for the food material can be adjusted. 
So, active packing anyway we are going to see intelligent packaging, I already told there is a
sensor system also comes along with packaging. So, this sensor system tells the consumer
that so there is some contamination happened inside the food material. So, that is nothing but
intelligent packaging system. 
So, what we are doing is active packaging, active packaging in the sense I add the active
components in the packaging material itself, so that can serve as a function of oxygen or
carbon dioxide scavengers, ethylene scavengers, anti-microbial component releases, ethanol
emitters, moistures absorbers and flavor or order absorbers. 
So, active or live packaging material allows one way transfer of gases away from the product.
So, it is nothing like the normal packaging, so the normal packaging has got degree of
permeability. So, based on the needs but here in the active packaging only one way transfer
of gases away from the product is allowed or it can allow the one way transfer or it can itself
absorb the gases which are harmful to the product. So, basically it should transfer the gases
which are harmful to the product or it should be able to absorb within itself. 
Many packaged  foods contain  active  enzyme  and other materials  that  could perform or
simulate a living system such as respiration. So, this we just discussed and benefits of the
controlled atmosphere with less oxygen and more carbon dioxide result in part from slowing
down the effects of these enzyme systems. So, if we maintain the controlled atmosphere withless oxygen and more carbon dioxide so which slows downs the respiration because we do
not have enough oxygen for this activity. 
(Refer Slide Time: 39:06)
So, the ethylene which is nothing but a plant hormone, so which accelerates this respiration in
fresh fruits and vegetables which leads to maturity and softening of tissues. Sometimes that
yellowish color also it creates the ethylene. So, active packaging system also play a part
either by absorbing ethylene or preferential transmission of this gas to prolong the shelf life
and maintain an acceptable visual quality of the respiring fruits and vegetables. 
So, if there are any respiring fruits and vegetables to be packed so we can use the active
packaging system which has got absorbing capacity of ethylene or it should preferentially
transmit  ethylene  inside  the  packaging  material  to  outside  environment.  So,  oxygen
scavenging also got same function which either absorb the oxygen in the packaging or it can
transmit the oxygen, so which prevents the rancidity which are being developed as a forms of
sachets or polymer additives. 
So, sachets also we can put as an oxygen scavengers but active packaging role is nothing but
so we can add some additive in the packaging film itself to serve as an oxygen scavengers.(Refer Slide Time: 40:30)
So, the residual oxygen cannot be effectively removed, so the question is here. So, we
discussed in the earlier classes, so we take care of the head space and we remove the oxygen
inside the thermal processing. During thermal processing we ensure that there is no oxygen
and also we maintain the head space vacuum. So, not to have any have oxygen inside the
cans. 
But here it will be very difficult to say even though we said, we maintain a head space
vacuum and we ensure that there is no oxygen inside the packaging or inside the cans during
thermal processing. There may be residual oxygen which cannot be effectively removed. So,
this conventional oxygen scavenging is too low to retard the changes in the many products.
So, there are conventional oxygen scavenging technics as well so as we said like we can put
any sachets or kind of scavengers but that is very low to retard the changes in the many
product. 
So, an active oxygen scavenging system it is that the plastic packages or designed in such a
way that they also take part in the oxygen scavenging activity. Thus forming an integral part
of structure itself. There is no extra oxygen scavengers to be added in the food or there will
not be any extra sachets which is added inside the packaging. It has the advantage of being
activated just prior to use. 
The package can be manufactured and stored under standard conditions, then triggered to an
activated state prior to filling. So, this kind of active packaging system the oxygen scavengers
are added in the film formation or the packaging material formation itself and the packaging
can be manufactured and stored under normal conditions whenever the packaging is used forfilling  at  that  time  the  oxygen  scavenger  activity  can  be  triggered.  So,  these  oxygen
scavengers are also added in the cap of a glass container, so this is also another active
packaging system. 
(Refer Slide Time: 42:47)
So, then what is called smart packaging, so we can also call it as an intelligent packaging. So,
here what we are doing is the surface modified phyllosilicate clay that is functionalized with
active iron produces an clay-iron composite to create a naturally sourced and highly efficient
oxygen scavenger. So, here the surface modified phyllosilicate clay which is functionalized
with the active iron. So, instead of directly using the active agent so here we are doing in the
phyllosilicate clay. 
So, we already talk about polymer filler and plasticizer unit. So, here the filler is nothing but
phyllosilicate clay. In the clay itself we functionalized with a active iron content. So, this
clay-iron composite creates a naturally sourced highly efficient oxygen scavenger. You know
iron is nothing but a good oxygen scavenger, the performance is enhanced. So, this is the
performances increased due to carrier oxygen scavenging iron. 
So, what happens exactly is oxygen is removed from the package by migrating through the
packaging material and reacting with the dispersed active iron to produce iron oxide. So,
which remains within the packaging material with the clay working as a barrier to any
migration. So, what we are telling here is, so here in the packaging material itself where we
have a phyllosilicate clay, so the phyllosilicate clay is here functionalized with the active iron
component, so which interacts with the oxygen and forms an iron oxide and the clay present
in it act as a barrier not to migrate further. So, it basically absorbs the iron oxide because if it goes to food then it may be a problem
again.  So, what happens here the oxygen is  removed from the packaging by migrating
through the packaging material and reacting with the dispersed active iron which is there in
the phyllosilicate clay itself and forms the iron oxide. So, the formed iron oxide remains
within the packaging material itself. So, with the clay working as a barrier to any migration.
So, here the clay takes care of absorbing the iron oxide which is produced during oxygen
scavenging action. 
And some polymer opal films so that change color to indicate the spoilage or DNA biochip
nanosensors that detect toxins, contaminants and pathogens and polymer repel water and dirt.
So, some of the polymer opal films also can be used so which has got changed in color
property based on the contamination level. And certain cases DNA biochip nanosensors also
use to detect the toxins, contaminants and pathogens. 
(Refer Slide Time: 46:02)
Then the next one is bioactive packaging. So, what is the difference between the active
packaging what we have seen and bioactive package? So, active packaging we are adding the
active materials, in smart packaging we also check the contamination level. So, without using
any extra active materials either we do it with the normal packaging whatever we use in the
filler itself the active scavenging agent is added and that is the way oxygen scavenging is
done. And also we told about the polymer films changing its color upon contamination. 
So, here in the bioactive packaging it is not only playing an active role but in bioactive
packaging so it has got great impact on the health of the consumer. So, it also play a role in
the  health  of the  consumer by generating  healthier  packaged  food. So, this  is  used forantimicrobial or oxygen scavenging purpose. So, the example is micro nano encapsulation
and  enzyme  incorporation  in  the  packaging  material.  So,  here  we  do  micro  or  nano
encapsulation or enzyme incorporation in the packaging material. 
So,  biomaterials  for  immobilization  of  enzymes,  so  here  we  said  that  so  enzyme
incorporation. So, how do we incorporate the enzyme in the packaging material? So, that we
do using immobilization. So, for this the functional bioactive packaging used or carrageenan,
chitosan, gelatin and polylactic acid and polyglycolic acid and alginate. So, this are used as a
bio material to immobilize the enzyme. 
And  active  enzymes  are  commonly  lactase,  glucose,  oxidase,  invertase,  glucoamylase,
lysozyme, alpha amylase, glucoamylase, naringinase and catalase and lactase. So, this are
active enzymes. So, the active materials, packaging material which used as this enzyme
immobilized biomaterials are this materials.
(Refer Slide Time: 48:23)
The  next  one  is  the  antimicrobial  packaging.  So,  food packaging  materials  may  obtain
antibacterial activity by common antibacterial substances by radiation or gas emission or
flushing. So, either one of the way the antimicrobial packaging system can be done. So, here
the food packaging materials  itself got antibacterial  activity.  So, by radiation  or by gas
emission or flushing. 
So, the incorporation  of antimicrobial  agents  with the polymeric  packaging provides  an
economical labor-free way to solve the food surface contamination problems. So, here soinstead of adding a separate substance in the food material or radiation means for example
laser or IR radiation so that is again harmful to food and gas submission and flushing as well. 
So, instead of doing we try to think how the antimicrobial agents can be directly added in the
polymeric packaging system itself to provide the purpose of antimicrobial packaging. So, not
the total amount of active components released but the amount that reached the surface at
critical time that is important. This we call it as a rate of release which is a critically
important parameter. 
So, if you see antimicrobial packaging there are lot of research and development happened in
this particular area. So, if you see there are lot of research article above to a maybe 500 also
you may find when you search for. So, all this things says that the such kind of antimicrobial
packaging system are common and it can be done. But the critical issue to be solved is so it is
not like how much active components are released, how we can have at a critical time, so
how much released to be there at the food surface, so that is what we call it as a kinetic. 
So,  that  is  what  critically  important  because  controlled  release,  you  cannot  release  it
everything at together. So, controlled release to prolong the shelf life. So, till it goes for
consumption so during the storage and distribution so how this antimicrobial materials can be
released at a controlled rate. That is what the critical issue to be addressed. Otherwise, the
antimicrobial packaging system are now a days very much common. 
So, a bacteriocin are which is called nisin was the antimicrobial most commonly incorporated
into  the  films  followed  by  food-grade  acids  and  salts,  chitosan,  plant  extracts  and  the
enzymes  lysozyme  and  lactoperoxidase.  So,  this  all  got  antimicrobial  activity.  So,  the
bacteriocin is the common antimicrobial agent which is included in the packaging material.
And also along with that foodgrade acid, salts, chitosan and plant extracts and lysozyme and
lactoperoxidase also added as an antimicrobial agent. 
And another important is this particular material which is nano silver so which are added into
various food contact materials such as plastics used to fabricate food containers, refrigerator
surfaces, bags and chopping boards and under the pretext of preserving foods for longer by
inhibiting the microbial growth. So, silver has got very good anti microbial property and also
we just said when you make it a nano material so it has got its own advantages the property
also improves. So, it can also contribute to that. So, this nano silver now a days got attracted in the antimicrobial packaging system. So, this is
added in most of the plastic food containers, refrigerator surfaces, bags and chopping boards.
And there are certain volatile antimicrobial components also used in the films. So, in such
case this antimicrobial compounds need not interact with the food. So, this are volatile so it
volatilize. So, we need not have this materials in the food surface to do the antimicrobial
activity. 
(Refer Side Time: 53:02)
So, the next one is edible packaging. So, the edible films and coatings applied to fresh
minimally processed and processed foods and vegetables are effective in extending their shelf
life and maintaining their microbiological sensory and nutritional qualities. So, instead of
active packaging, active packaging in the sense active materials are directly included in the
films. So, instead of that so we can coat those material bioactive materials in the surface of
the films as well. So, it gives the good microbiological sensory and nutritional quality. 
So, that means the edible packaging can be done to fresh also minimally processed and
processed foods and vegetables and which are effective in extending the shelf life of food by
maintaining  the  required  microbiological  characteristics  and  sensory  properties  and
nutritional qualities. 
So, the most important properties we need to consider while doing the edible coating or
microbiological stability of the coating material and adhesion on the film surface or any
packaging material surface and cohesion and wettability, solubility, transparency, mechanical
sensory properties and permeability to water vapor and gases. So, this are all the properties
we need to check before coating any edible coating material on the packaging. (Refer Slide Time: 54:41)
So, here I stop. So, the next class we talk about the regulations and food processing industry.
So, here in this particular research article I have taken the whatever the polymer layer silicate
interaction as well as the TEM image and these two literatures were used in this lecture. So,
these are extra references and additional resources, so we will meet for next class thank you.
 