Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Department of Chemical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Lecture 20:
Nanofiltration, Electrodialysis and Membrane separation 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:28) 
Good morning, one and all. So last two classes we have seen the membrane separation
processes. In the first class, we have probably discussed about the various modules
available and basics of membrane separation process in food industry where they are
exactly  used, in our second lecture. So we have seen specifically  the four different
membrane  separation  process  which  are nothing  but micro  filtration,  ultra  filtration,
reverse osmosis and nano filtration.
And in the last class, we told that, where these five processes are being applied in food
industry, in the general cases and applications and what are all the modules available for
each membrane separation process everything we have seen. And also, we have in-depth
discussed about micro filtration as well as ultra filtration. In the ultra filtration, we have
ended our second lecture with the cheese making and fractionation of whey process.
So I will start from there with small recap of fractionation of whey and other applications
of ultra filtration. And today's class, we are going to see about the nano filtration andreverse  osmosis  and  also  electrodialysis.  If  time  permits,  we  will  do  two  or  three
problems. Actually here I would like to mention about these, my membrane separation
process, we are seeing it in application wise, right.
So, we are not going to do in-depth analysis of various membrane separation processes,
because there are lot of modifications in it and there are a lot of theories and also we are
not discussing anything on the mathematical side of it, mathematical modeling or the
calculations regarding the membrane separation process. So we are mostly concentrating
on the application side, in food processing industry.
So what are all the membrane separation process are being used and how do I choose the
membrane for particular application, okay. So, but still we will do certain problems on
how to find out the osmotic pressure and how to find out the retentate and permeate
concentration that we will do, okay. So I will start with whatever we ended in the last
class to make you remind few things.
So fractionation of whey using ultra filtration. So that was done by the retentate is
nothing but noncasein protein and along with some low molecular weight solute, so,
which are nothing but a lactose and mineral salts. So ultra filtration is used to fractionate
this whey part, that is nothing but a valuable whey protein concentrate as a retentate and
the  protein  free  permeate  which  contains  mainly  lactose  and  minerals,  lactose  and
minerals, these both comes in permeate and the whey protein is concentrated.
So the retentate is usually concentrated further, retentate is nothing but a valuable whey
protein using a evaporation or spray-dried, the further thermal processing. So these two
are thermal processing, okay. So instead of going directly from the noncasein protein part
of the whey to evaporate or spray-dried, so if you use in between the membrane, so you
can reduce the energy load which is being spent on evaporation or spray-dried. So these
are  all  thermal  processes,  okay. So  then  further  these  whey  proteins  are  used  for
manufacturing  of  cheese  and  considerable  array  of  food  products  and  health  food
specialties. (Refer Slide Time: 04:36)
So the process goes like this, the pretreated pasteurized whey, so which is being fed into
micro  filtration  membrane.  So from there we get the fat or curd residues, then the
permeate goes for another process which is nothing but ultra filtration. So here is what
the main process is being done, then the permeate is collected and the retentate is further
added with a diafiltration water.
So this diafiltration probably I have told you in the last class itself, the diafiltration also
they use it as a separate membrane process. So which is nothing but, I will take the
retentate, retentate of ultra filtration and add some water and further go for another ultra
filtration module. So this is nothing, but a diafiltration. So we add the diafiltration water
in the retentate which comes from the first ultra-filtration module.
Then further the permeates are getting collected as a lactose recovery, which is nothing
but a purified concentration and spray-drying. So, this lactose further fed into these
processes, either spray-drying or evaporation process. So then the retentate is nothing but
a whey protein concentrate, right. So the permeate from the micro filtration comes into
ultra filtration, so the retentate is taken and the diafiltration water is added into that and it
goes for further ultra filtration, the retentate after second ultra filtration is nothing but awhey protein concentrate, the permeate is further purified and concentrated and go for
spray-drying to remove the lactose.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:31)
So  the  other  applications  of  ultra  filtration  is  used  to  for  clarification  of  clear  or
microfiltered fruit juices and if appropriate membranes are used. So the ultra filtration
also we have given the ranges, right. So the range of pore size and range of the pressure
applied also, right. So if the appropriate membranes are chosen between the range where
my micro organisms  get filtered,  then this  ultrafiltered  juices  are practically  free of
microorganisms, right.
So the range, the pore size range what I have to choose is, so, that should be able to retain
the microorganism, if that is the case, so, we call it as a cold pasteurization or cold
sterilization, without applying the thermal processing. So the use of ultra filtration for the
concentration and fractionation  of plant protein extracts  also suggested. So the ultra
filtration membranes we use to concentrate and fractionation of plant protein. So one
such case is soybean protein production, so, the ultra filtration membrane is use. So in
this defatted soy flour is extracted with the water at high pH. So, the aqueous extract is
then concentrated by ultra filtration.(Refer Slide Time: 07:48)
So the processes here, so, first defatted soy flour and then one alkali and water, this is fed
into the tank. So this is further pumped to the decanter. So, decanter does the separation
based on the density. So the high density, high density part of the feed is getting collected
in the bottom, the clear upper part will further pumped into the micro filtration module.
So the concentrated part we call it as a Okara. So this is nothing but a soy pulp, right.
So the further the clear, the upper portion will be further fed into the micro filtration then
the permeate is further sent to the ultra filtration. So from the ultra filtration, we collect
the permeate as a waste, then the retentate is further added with the diafiltration water and
further concentrated using the ultra filtration. So, the permeate is goes as a waste, the
retentate is nothing but a soy protein extract, so, which goes further for precipitation.(Refer Slide Time: 08:55)
The other applications of ultra filtration is the sugar, actually here itself. So, this is we
have used to twice, right, the ultra filtration module. First we remove the permeate and
take the retentate and add the diafiltration water then further we go for ultra filtration, we
collect the permeate and retentate. So this also further you can do more two or three
times. right. 
So the sugars and other low molecular weight solutes may be partially removed by
repeated steps of dilution and ultra filtration so, that is nothing but a diafiltration, dilution
and further ultra filtration which is nothing but a diafiltration, so, this we continue these
steps and produce the purified and concentrated soy protein extract for further processing.
So this also can be done, so, the soy protein extract at what percentage you want it. So
based on that number of you, ultra filtration modules can be added further, okay. So, the
UF  first  used  commercially  as  an  alternative  to  evaporative  concentration  in  the
production of gelatin as well. So for this gelatin production also this ultra filtration
membrane is used as an alternative to evaporation.(Refer Slide Time: 10:13)
So today we mostly concentrate on reverse osmosis and nano filtration. So, most these,
both techniques have much of overlap. So I will tell what is the exact difference in couple
of slides after. So the reverse osmosis, the major application is water desalination, so this
we are all know, the moment we say the reverse osmosis so, the first thing comes into our
mind is water desalination and wastewater treatment and water softening, water softening
is nothing but ions removal, the unwanted ions removal from the water.
The RO and NF in the food industry is however for concentrating the liquid foods by
membrane  removal  of  water.  So  reverse  osmosis,  water  desalination  most  of  the
applications are related to wastewater treatment, but here in food industry, so where we
use reverse osmosis is nothing but to concentrate the liquid foods by membrane removal
of water, by removing water how do we concentrate.
So this can be done by the evaporation as well. So to do by evaporation, I need to add the
heat,  right.  So, but here  with  the  membrane  itself  by applying  the  reverse  osmotic
pressure, I can remove the water from the liquid food, right, to concentrate them further.
The advantage is tremendous saving in the energy expenditure as I told, so the heat is not
being applied here and elimination of the risk of thermal damage of the product. Obviously, if you are not using the heat for processing then you can avoid the thermal
damage and better retention of volatile aromas. Since we are not applying the heat, the
volatile aromas gets retained, so, then your food also looks fresh, then lower capital
investment. So we are not investing anything large on this part because it is just a
membrane process. We don't need to imply any heat transfer requirements, that is why the
lower capital cost.
And the limitation wise, fluids of low osmotic pressure and relatively low viscosity. So in
the reverse osmosis, because you are applying the pressure against the osmotic pressure,
so this processes can be applied only for fluids with the low osmotic pressure, that means
salts, most of the time salts cannot be handled because they have a high osmotic pressure
compared to other materials and a relatively low viscosity product only can be handled.
And the process of preconcentration before final concentration by evaporation. 
This is not a limitation. So this is a advantage, right. So before going for evaporation. So,
for example, I need to have some 70 percentage of this concentrated solids. So I can do
up to 40 percentage using any RO and after that remaining 30 percentage can be done by,
remaining 30 percentage can be done by evaporation, okay. So in that case, so you are
reducing the energy load which is given if we go for directly evaporation.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:26)
And preconcentration of maple sap was one of the first specific applications of RO in
food processing industry. So this is nothing but a plant protein, okay. So when the reverse
osmosis was tried in the food industry, the first one, the preconcentration was done on the
maple sap. So this is maple sap or maple water because it is a extremely diluted solution
containing an average of 2.5 percentage soluble solid.
So that means 2.5 degrees of Brix. This is a unit, right. So the sugar content of an
aqueous solution, right, 1 gram of sucrose in 100 grams of solution and represents the
strength of the solution as a percentage by mass, right. So 2.5 percentage soluble solids
that I can express in terms of 2.5 degrees Brix. So this is nothing but a 1 gram sugar in
100 grams of solution, so that is nothing but 1 Brix unit, okay.
So,  if  the  solution  contains  dissolved  solids  other  than  pure  sucrose  then  Bx  only
approximates the dissolved solid contents, okay. So the unit is Bx which is nothing but a
Brix, okay. So this is just to tell you about the unit, but what we are discussing is the
maple sap which is an extremely diluted solution containing and an average of 2.5
percentage soluble solid.
So where, how the reverse osmosis is being used to concentrate this maple sap that is
what the process is, the sap must be concentrated to 66 to 68 Bx. So that means 66
percentage  of  the  soluble  solids  is  being  concentrated  using  a  reverse  osmosis  by
removing about 96 kg of water from every 100 kg of sap, remember, almost 96 kg of
water which contains in the 100 kg of sap, right. So this is a huge quantity of water 96 kg
from me every 100 kg of sap.(Refer Slide Time: 15:39)
So typically. so 75 percentage to 80 percentage of this quantity of water can be removed
by RO. So that means 96 kg I am having, so in that, almost 75 to 80 percentage of water,
kg of water can be removed by using what, reverse osmosis, then further amount of water
can be removed using evaporation or drying, okay. So the without increasing the osmotic
pressure and viscosity to unacceptable levels.
So one may think, okay, 96 kg of water can be removed, why can not we do in reverse
osmosis at one go, right. So, but what restricts me to do so is the osmotic pressure and
viscosity, right. So when you remove the water, the soluble solids gets concentrated, so
the viscosity should not go unacceptable levels, so that in that case, I may not be able to
apply the reverse osmosis.
The same way, when you concentrate further and further, the osmotic pressure also gets
increased, right. So you need to push them again the membrane surface. So in that case,
so, these two are limiting parameters which limits me. So how much percentage of the
water from 96 kg of water can be removed, so that, these two based on osmotic pressure
and the viscosity of the solution then 75 to 80 percentage of the 96 kg of water is
removed.The intermediate product, intermediate product in the sense, first we have told here, so it
is almost 96 kg of water per 100 kg of sap. So in this, I will remove, I removed 75 to 80
percentage of the water using RO, so the remaining product we call it as a intermediate
product, intermediate concentrated product, so intermediate concentrated product, okay.
So this is intermediate product to the standard concentration of commercial maple syrup. 
So only 20 to 25 percentage of the water has to be removed by subsequent evaporation.
So the maple syrup is highly concentrated one, okay. So what we are doing here maple
sap, which is nothing but a 2.5 percentage of the solid content. So that is being processed
using membrane separation which is nothing but RO and evaporation to get the maple
syrup. So in that RO part is almost 75 to 80 percentage of 96 kg of water per 100 kg of
sap. 
The maple sap has relatively high tolerance to high temperature, so in that case, RO is
carried out at 80 degree centigrade and above, resulting in higher capacity and improved
microbiological safety. So this food is tolerant to temperature, so the RO process is
carried out at higher temperature which is nothing but 80 degrees centigrade. So which
gives us the microbiologically safe food with higher capacity.
And one must also be careful, because the membrane separation process we are doing it
only to fold one is to reduce the energy consumption and if my food has the large
particulate solids then how to handle, so for that purpose also we move to membrane
separation. The other advantage is since we are not using the high temperature process,
my volatile aromas get retained, right, and also nutritional quantity. 
So here we are mainly concentrating on the microbial safety that is why we are going for
80 degrees centigrade and one must ensure at this temperature the nutrient quality as well
as the volatile aroma if the food is of having these two advantage or if the food is having
a lot of volatile aroma or nutrient content. So we need to think about why we are
processing at this high temperature of 80 degrees centigrade, that is what probably we are
doing it in thermal processing as well.(Refer Slide Time: 19:59)
So the RO concentration of very dilute solutions concerns aromas and aqueous extracts of
herbs and teas. So in this case, so the RO is applied for to retain the aromas as well as
when we process the extracts of herbs and teas so we need to be processing at lower
temperature, okay. So that is way my choice is RO to get the aqueous extracts of herbs
and teas. And concentration of fruit and vegetable juices, mostly apples, citrus fruits and
pineapple, there also RO has been investigated, the process of RO has been investigated
extensively.
And pre concentration of tomato juice is particularly interesting because of its relatively
low  initial  concentration,  so  which  is  about  4  to  5  Brix.  So  here  we  are  mainly
concentrating the tomato juice using RO, so instead of going for evaporation. And RO pre
concentration of fruit juices is usually carried to an upper concentration limit of 20 to 30
Brix, right. So here the pre concentration is done using RO, the final concentration is
done using evaporation or drying technique.
The same way orange juice to 36 Brix by RO at a TMPD of, TMPD is nothing but trans
membrane pressure difference, okay. So the orange juice to 36 Brix by RO at a TMPD of
6 mega pascal, but the concentrate was devoid of the characteristic of aroma and fresh
juices, this is what I just mentioned, right. So we can go for higher temperature andhigher  concentrations  and  also  we  need,  which  restricts  me  is  to  go  for  a  higher
concentration, one is osmotic pressure and the viscosity of the product, but if we process
at higher temperature, I feel like that is microbiologically safe, but the thing is we also
look into what happens to the characteristic aroma of the food product, right.
So the more and more temperature you go, that the aroma will get decreased, so that is
the reason I choose RO, right. So when you choose RO to concentrate any liquid product
to pre concentration, so these are all the important and critical factors we need to also
keep in mind. So if I go for higher temperature process, what happens to volatile aroma
and if you are going for a higher concentration, so how much osmotic pressure I need to
apply and what is the viscosity of the product. So this restricts me, so what temperature I
need to process my reverse osmosis or what concentration I need to choose for pre
concentration of liquid food.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:06)
 The tomato juice tolerates well high temperatures and usually RO treated at temperatures
above 60 degree for tomato juice. The juices containing suspended particles are first
clarified by micro filtration and only the clear filtrate or serum is concentrated by RO. If
desired, the removed pulp is added back to the RO concentrate for cloudiness and aroma,
right. So even for ultra filtration, this is what we have seen, right. The first the juices orany product, any food product, what we do is we first clarify it using a micro filtration
then we are sending to ultra filtration, here also same way. 
So the suspended particles are first clarified using micro filtration then fed into RO
process. So if desired removed pulp is added back, removed pulp in the sense, the,
whatever you removed from the micro filtration can be added after the reverse osmosis
process to get the aroma and fresh taste, okay. So the RO is applied to whole milk, skim
milk and whey, so milk processing also RO is being applied. RO concentrated whole milk
is used in the manufacture of cheese, yogurt and ice cream.
So for these manufacture cheese, yogurt, ice cream manufacturing, the concentration of
whole milk can be done using reverse osmosis process as well. The pre concentration of
milk and other dairy fluids prior to conventional evaporative concentration and drying.
So  the  pre  concentration  of  milk  and  other  dairy  fluids  so  prior  to  conventional
evaporative concentration and drying, the RO is being used and concentration of liquid
egg by RO is also reported. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:01)
The lower molecular weight and its hydrophilic nature, the ethanol is only partially
rejected by RO membranes, right. So the ethanol concentration also can be done using a
reverse osmosis membrane, but here due to low molecular weight also it is hydrophilicnature restricts the RO membrane in ethanol concentration, because what happens is, the
ethanol is partially rejected and your permeate also will have the ethanol component,
right. So some of the ethanol is transported to the permeate, while practically all other
solutes including flavor aroma compounds are retained.
So when you process the alcohol with the RO membrane, right, so the retentate is,
retentate here is flavors and aroma, the permeate is nothing but will have alcohol as well,
permeate will also contain partial, partial amount, okay. So the alcohol and water, the
main is the permeate component is water. So the water plus alcohol in the permeate may
be separated and recovered by distillation  to remove the alcohol component so that
diluting  the  retentate  with  the  recovered  water, a  beverage  with  the  full  aroma  but
reduced alcohol content is obtained.
So whatever we got as a retentate here, so that will be added with the water, right. So the
retentate  includes  the solutes, flavors  and aroma,  the permeate  includes  alcohol  and
water. So this alcohol and water component further distilled, distillation is nothing but
another thermal processing only, so we apply the heat, right. So here you have a low
boiling as well as high boiling mixture.
So the low boiling one will get the, will get evaporated first and gets collected as a
condensate, the higher boiling one will come later, right, or taken as a bottom product,
okay. So that is the way I separate the alcohol and water. This water separated water from
the permeate again added into the retentate which has the solutes, flavors and aroma. So
this is the partial amount of alcohol is already removed, right. 
So that means the one what I prepare now is a beverage with the full aroma, but reduced
alcohol content, right. So what I have is? The flavor, flavor component, aroma, plus some
solutes and also the alcohol is also there, partial alcohol, because the partial alcohol only
goes into permeate, right. So in the permeate, I will have water and alcohol, further it is
distilled to remove the water so that water is fed back, so that means some of the alcohol
went into permeate. So that I am not adding, the beverage now contains only the aroma
and solutes without much alcohol content, so that means reduced alcohol content.(Refer Slide Time: 28:38)
So now the admixture of the recovered alcohol to the original beverage results in a
product  with  increased  alcohol  content.  So what  I  did, so  here  in the  distillation  I
removed the water and alcohol, the water I have went back and added in the retentate, so
the removed alcohol can be added into the original beverage and the product will be
having higher or increased alcohol content, the original product, right, original product
will have certain alcohol content, if this alcohol is also added. 
So  that  particular  beverage  contains  the  higher  amount  of  alcohol  content.  Another
application of RO is in the wine industry is the concentration of grape must. So the grape
must is the fresh juice, which is not brewed, so the fresh juice which has the fruit pulps
also. So the concentration of grape must also the RO is used. So RO and NF are being
increasingly used for the pre concentration of thin juices and the production of sugar from
the beet and cane, right.
So then we produce the sugar from sugar cane, so there also the RO and NF process are
being  used  to  pre  concentrate  the  thin  juices  and  condensate  of  evaporators.  So
evaporator we have seen, right, so we take the dilute solution and we apply heat, right, so
the water gets evaporated, right. So when you further condensed that water, so that is
called evaporator condensate, right. So the condensate of evaporators are not pure water,but containing varying amount of organic matter. So when the water evaporates, it also
carries some of the organic matter we cannot say that is a pure water. 
So the treatment of these condensates by RO or NF helps recover important quantities of
high quality water and reduces the cost of water disposal. So what did we say? The,
whatever the condensate, whatever the vapor comes out of the evaporator, we condensate,
so that is called evaporator condensate. So this also has some of the organic matter
because whatever the material I am processing in the evaporator which may have organic
matter.
So when the water evaporates it also carries with some of the organic matter with it. So
because of that, the condensate whatever I am getting from the evaporator, so that is not
of pure water, right. So this condensates after cool, it is sent to the RO or nano filtration
membrane, so which removes those organic matter and produces the high quality water,
right. And one thing is I am getting high quality water, another point of view in the cost
effective matter, I am also reducing the cost of waste disposal.
So that means, so if you have to throw this condensate with all organic matter, you have a
certain environmental regulations, right. So that is not that easy process. So you are also
getting the high quality water and also you are reducing the cost of waste disposal. So
this particular process is called condensate polishing, right, the condensate polishing. So
there my RO and nano filtration membranes are being used.(Refer Slide Time: 32:11)
So now nano filtration. So certain applications I also told commonly for RO as well as
nano filtration. So now, we are going to see what is exactly the difference between the
reverse osmosis as well as nano filtration. So the RO deals with the removal of organic
solvent from edible oil Miscella. So the Miscella is nothing but solution resulting from
the extraction of oil by organic solvent. So that is nothing but a Miscella, it is used in the
extraction of oil, right.
So extraction of oil is done using the organic solvents. So whatever the solution you get
that is nothing but a Miscella. So the RO deals with the removal of organic solvent. So
the Miscella contains the organic solvents as well as whatever the component to be
removed from the oil. So to remove the organic solvents from the edible oil Miscella, the
RO is being used. 
So  in  the  same  process  nano  filtration  membranes  also  can  be  used  because  the
membranes used here are nano filtration membranes resistant to oil and organic solvents,
the apt one to be used instead of RO is nothing but nano filtration membrane. So that
means, the particular application, particular application of removal of oil from organic
solvents, so we can use RO as well as nano filtration. So if you see before here also weare using RO or nano filtration to polish the condensate, right. So that means what is the
difference between them, why they can be used interchangeably, right. 
So the key difference between RO and NF is nothing but a rejection of monovalent ions
and cations, right. So the key difference between reverse osmosis and nano filtration is
nothing  but  a  rejection  of  monovalent  non ions  and  cations,  while  the  rejection  of
monovalent ions by RO membrane is practically absolute. So absolute means the RO
membranes removed completely monovalent ions, but your nano filtration membranes
rejected them to the particular extent only. 
So it cannot reject the monovalent ions fully, rights. So this depends the partial removal
of the monovalent ions based on the extent of penetration depending on the type of
membrane, concentration of the feed and TMPD, right. So why it is partially removing
the monovalent ions is because of these three major factors. 
So the partial amount, right, whether it is a 10 percentage, or 20 percentage, or 30
percentage, so the percentage of removal or extent of monovalent ions removal is based
on the type of membrane we use and the concentration of the feed under trans membrane
pressure difference. So because of that nano filtration is sometime called as leaky RO,
leaky RO in the sense, RO could retain monovalent ions, but nano filtration could retain
them partially because of that it is called leaky reverse osmosis process.(Refer Slide Time: 35:37)
 The  polyvalent  ions  are  preferentially  rejected  by  nano  filtration,  for  non  charged
molecules, the cut off molecular weight is on the order of 100 to 300 Daltons. The being
less dense then RO membranes, the nano filtration membranes are less dense compared to
RO membranes. The permeate flux can be achieved by nano filtration at lower TMPD,
right. The same permeate flux can be achieved by nano filtration at lower TMPD because
what we are doing now is, we are comparing just reverse osmosis and nano filtration.
So nano filtration membranes are less dense compared to RO membranes. So to get the
same permeate flux by nano filtration, I can apply only lower TMPD compared to the
reverse  osmosis  process.  Furthermore,  since  monovalent  ions  pass  through  the
membrane, the osmotic pressure difference, which is nothing but a Del-Pi is lower in
nano filtration membrane compared to reverse osmosis. So this is particularly important
in fluids containing mineral salts because we have already told for mineral salts osmotic
pressure is high.
So when we process the mineral salts through nano filtration membrane, so the process
can be done at lower osmotic pressure difference. The nano filtration is advantageously
used for demineralization and deacidification of UF permeate of whey, right. So whatever
the  permeate  we  get  it  from  the  ultra  filtration  membrane,  so  that  can  be  furtherdeacidified using nano filtration, right. The permeate of whey which comes out of the
ultra filtration can be further deacidified using nano filtration membrane. 
Another important application of nano filtration is water softening, where the preferential
retention of bivalent ions of calcium and magnesium produces hardness free permeate.
So, CA2 plus MG2 plus, this bivalent ions are removed from the water using nano
filtration, that is called water softening. So, if you remember in the earlier slide itself I
told, right, the water softening is nothing but the hardness of the water is removed, so the
hardness mainly comes from the bivalent ions which is nothing but calcium 2 plus and
magnesium 2 plus ions. So that is being removed using nano filtration.
(Refer Slide Time: 38:09)
So the last one is electro dialysis, till now we have seen ultra filtration, first micro
filtration, ultra filtration then reverse osmosis and then nano filtration. So nano filtration
and  reverse  osmosis  can  be  used  interchangeably,  but  nano  filtration  has  certain
advantages  over  reverse  osmosis,  but  remember  the  monovalent  ions  are  partially
removed using nano filtration, but that is completely removed using reverse osmosis.
So based on your application, you had to choose though nano filtration choose some of
the advantages over reverse osmosis, we supposed to choose based on the process what
we are going to apply, what membrane process to be chosen. The electrodialysis is anelectro chemical membrane process by which ions are transported through the perm-
selective membranes, through perm-selective membranes under the effect of an electric
field, right.
So electric field is a driving force here, it is an electro chemical membrane process by
which  ions  are  transported  through  perm  selective  membranes  under  electric  field.
Electro dialysis membranes are sheets of ion exchange material. So the ion exchange
material is nothing but it exchanges particular ions only. The ions are separated by ED
membranes according to their charge, right, whether it is anion or cation. So ED is most
commonly used to for the transfer of ions into or from the pumpable fluids, right. 
So whether to remove the ions or add the ions, add the ions in the sense, in food
processing, sometimes we told right, so if there is any nutrient quality is deficient so we
can also add them during the process to get the particular nutrient level. So their one of
the application maybe the addition of ions, ionic components. So ED is most commonly
used for the transfer of ions into or from the pumpable fluids. One of the first uses of ED
was the desalination of brackish water. So the water desalination only the first electro
dialysis was applied.
(Refer Slide Time: 40:28)
The application wise, desalting and demineralization, deacidification or acidification of
liquid food, so deacidification you are supposed to remove the ions, acidification you are
supposed to add ions. So that is what here we meant and electro migration of green tea
catechins and phenol separation, phenol is also nothing but partially charged, okay. So we
can use ED process for phenolic component separation as well.
The assembly consists of alternating anionic and cationic membrane, so these are nothing
but an ion exchange membrane which permeate only particular ion arrange in a state
similar to the plate frame configuration, plate frame membrane module we have already
seen. The anionic or anion exchanger membranes are permeable to anions and reject
cations, the cationic or cation exchanger membranes are permeable to cations and reject
anions, okay.
(Refer Slide Time: 41:43)
So here is the diagram. So the example here it is taken as a sea water. So, this AEM is
nothing  but  anionic  exchanging  on  anionic  exchange  membrane,  so  CEM  is  cation
exchange membrane, okay. So that your anion and cation exchange membrane is stacked
in a alternative manner. So your seawater is being fed into in between two anionic and
cationic exchanging membrane. So here you have a anode which is nothing but a positive
electrode, here we have a cathode which is nothing but a negative electrode. The feed,right, so here we have seen as a example, as we have taken seawater as an example, but
this can be your fluid particles as well. 
So if you see your electrode is not being in touch with the product whatever you are using
for the separation, okay. So here the electrolyte solution is being used, electrolyte solution
is used in both the places, electrolyte solution, okay. So now first we will see, so here
electrolyte solution, so this is Na plus and so this is NO3 minus, blue one is NO3 minus,
the red one is Na plus ions. So the anion is nothing but a negatively charged, the cation is
nothing but positive, right. So the anion tend to accumulate near the anode because it is a
positive electrode, the cations tend to accumulate near the cathode which is a positive ion,
so the anion pass through anion exchange membrane. 
The cations  pass  through cation exchange membrane.  So when you are feeding  the
seawater  here.  So  the  NO3  plus  and  Cl  minus  tend  to  pass  through  the  anionic
exchanging membrane, so which allows the negative charge, right. The same way Na
plus and K plus, the positively charged ions pass through the CEM, right. So then it gets
concentrated in this particular space. Why? Because the when the cations moves here, so
it has a cation exchanging membrane.
So when the anion moves this side, it will not allow further, so the Na plus and Cl minus
gets accumulated here, then if you see the next compartment, the NO3 passes through the
anion exchange membrane, and K plus and Na plus will pass through the cation exchange
membrane, then here in this particular space, they get concentrated. So this is the way we
collect the concentrate from this, this and you have a dilutant, which is free of ions right
because the ions moved through the ion exchange membrane. 
So you collect the dilute, okay. So this is the electro dialysis process. So you have two ion
exchange membranes which passes specifically either anion or cation. So the anion pass
through the anionic exchange membrane and gets collected near the anode and cation
pass through the catatonic exchange membrane and gets collected near the cathode.
And also remember, your product is not being in touch with the electrode because that
will be taken care by the electrode solution. So from this, wherever the concentratorsconcentrated we collect the concentrate which is nothing but a salt particle, organic salts
and wherever the salts is removed, so that is nothing but a dilute, so if you want pure
water, so the dilute is nothing but your pure water.
(Refer Slide Time: 45:53)
So the more discriminating selectivity among ions of the same charge depends on pore
size of the membrane. So what we have seen here is, so I have taken two molecule, right,
Na plus and K plus, right, in terms of a cation. So if I want to remove only Na plus, so
that can be done by the pore size, right. Based on the pore size, I can remove even from
same cations.
So I can further differentiate them into K plus, Na plus by taking care of the pore size of
the membrane, whether only K plus to be removed or Na plus to be removed. The pore
size of commercial ED membranes varies between 10 and 100 A . And one of the first   
applications of ED in food processing was the partial deacidification of fruit juices that
are too sour to be acceptable, right.
If the acid content is more, we feel that sour taste. So to remove the acid component or
deacidification of fruit juices, the ED was first employed in the food processing industry,
although the acidity can be reduced by precipitation of the acid. So commonly citric or
malic acid, as a calcium salt or by absorption on an anion ionic exchanger in OH form,the DE, DE is nothing but the electro dialysis, deacidification has the greater advantage
of avoiding addition of chemicals.
So the thing is, the deacidification in earlier also before applying ED, the deacidification
in industries were done by either one of these mechanism. One is, the precipitation of
acid using the calcium salt and or absorption of an anionic exchanger in the OH form,
right. So, both the ways the deacidification can be done, but still the ED deacidification
has the greater advantage because we are not adding any chemicals here, right.
So that is the way the ED is advantageous one compared to commercial precipitation of
acid using the calcium salt. So here the acidity can be reduced in two ways, one is,
absorption  of  anion  in  OH  form,  so  other  way  is  adding  calcium  salt,  okay, and
precipitate, okay. So this is conventionally followed, but when you apply ED here, right,
that is advantage compared to normal precipitation using calcium salt.
(Refer Slide Time: 48:50)
And the high mineral content of whey and whey products is sometimes  undesirable
particularly when material is intended for infant feeding. So that means, the high mineral
content  in  the  whey  or  whey  products,  so  there  also  electro  dialysis  provides
technologically sound method for demineralizing whey and desalting products such as
soy sauce. So these two applications also electro dialysis is being used.(Refer Slide Time: 49:19)
So in the fundamental calculation wise, we supposed to calculate the water flux, right. So
for that the formula being used is J equal to kA Del P minus Del Pi, so, the J is nothing
but a permeate flux, permeate flux so which is kg per hour, okay. So where K is nothing
but the mass transfer coefficient, mass transfer coefficient, so which is in the unit of kg
per meter square, per hour and Pasacl, okay.
So Del P and Del A in Pascal, so Del P is nothing but applied pressure, applied pressure,
so which is also in Pascal. So Del Pi is nothing but your osmotic pressure, osmotic
pressure which is also in Pascal. So A is nothing but a area, which is in meter square,
okay. So this is Pi which is nothing but a osmotic pressure. So your M is nothing but in
terms of concentration.
So this is your Pi is nothing but osmotic pressure, osmotic pressure, osmotic pressure, so
which is in Pascal, okay. So your R is nothing but, so which is in Pascal, your R is
nothing but a gas constant which is nothing but kilo joules per kilo mole Kelvin, right. So
kilo  joules  per  kilo  mole  per  Kelvin,  so  your  T is  in  Kelvin,  T is  nothing  but  a
temperature. So this is nothing but kilo mole per meter cube.
So this is nothing but the Million, right. So that is nothing but a concentration, M is
nothing but a concentration, so the kilo mole, kilo mole gets cancel, Kelvin, Kelvin getscancel, you will get kilo joule is nothing but Newton meter, so this is nothing but meter
cube, so which is nothing but meter square. So it is nothing but kilo Newton per meter
square, so we call it as a KPa, okay. So your whatever the osmotic pressure you calculate
which will be in KPa, right.
 So kilo Pascal, so your M is nothing but a concentration here, so that is nothing but
moles  per meter cube, kilo moles  per meter cube and your R is nothing but a gas
constant, kilo joules per kilo mole Kelvin, the T is nothing but Kelvin, Kelvin, Kelvin get
canceled, kilo mole, kilo mole get cancel, so kilo joules per meter cube, so kilo Newton
meter, joule is nothing but a Newton meter, so kilo Newton per meter square which is in
KPa. So this is the way you can calculate osmotic pressure Pi is nothing but MRT, M is
concentration, R is gas constant, T is temperature.
So after calculating the osmotic pressure difference you can go back and substitute in the
Flexi equation. So this is automatic pressure, this is applied pressure, K is nothing but a
mass transfer coefficient, A is the area, so you will get your permeate flux in terms of kg
per hour here, okay. So if you apply your mass transfer coefficient in terms of kg meter
square hour Pascal. So if possible, we will do one or two problems in next class.(Refer Slide Time: 53:22)
And these are all the resources and additional references what I have used in this lecture.
Thank you.