Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor. R. Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Lecture No. 27
Packaging Considerations: Barrier and Mechanical 
Properties different food Packaging Materials
Good morning all. So today we are going to discuss about the food packaging considerations.
So this week I got two lectures, one is on barrier and mechanical properties of different food
packaging materials and the next lecture is all about the bio nano composite food packaging
materials. So composite films I have already discussed in one of the lecture how we form
composite materials, what was the aim for making such a composites? 
So it in today’s lecture we are going to discuss about the packaging consideration. So what
should be the basic characteristics of the packaging materials and what are all the food
packaging materials available and what about their barrier which is nothing but a transport of
any gases or water vapor through the packaging material and mechanical properties, which is
nothing but a its strength and elongation. 
(Refer Slide Time: 1:41)  
So we will with that small introduction we will go to the lecture. So the food processing and
preservation it is important unit operations in food processing and preservation. So the food
packaging is nothing but a important unit operation in food processing and preservation. So it
is not only the packaging is called food preservation. So earlier we have discussed about
drying and freezing also food preservation because drying we reduce the moisture content. Inthat way we also have minimum water activity for the contamination to occur. That also
freezing that we do normally at day-to-day life. If we want to keep any seasonal vegetables or
foods,  we  will  freeze  them  for  about  maybe  1  to  2  months.  So  those  are  also  food
preservation techniques, drying and freezing. 
But in packaging what it offers is the packaging and quality management tools needs to be
implemented in the process to avoid contamination and recontamination. Because it has to be
store and it has to be distributed. So in that case, the packaging and quality management is a
important tool. So if we want to store we can use either drying or freezing, but especially
when it has to be transported from place to place and it has to be stored and sometimes in the
sterilisation we have also seen with the packaging it is undergoing a thermal treatment. So in
such cases the packaging and quality management is very much important.
In recent days packaging materials, diversified packaging materials, we got and various
packaging designs and packaging equipments, and in achieving and environmental, safety
and sustainability. So we have got many options on packaging materials, packaging design
and packaging equipment, with the aim of achieving an environmental safety, as well as
sustainability. So here we can say something like biodegradable. 
So in one of the lecture what I have discussed this one when I throw it in an environment it
should not create any environmental pollution. So, our aim, or our research moves towards
that  kind  of  an  environmental  safety  and  sustainability.  So  packaging  performs  many
functions. So one is product containment, and preservation and quality, and presentation, and
convenience, protection, providing storage history and it got many more functions. So we put
them together in mainly 4 category and we will discuss about that. One is on containment,
another  one  is  on  protection  and  preservation.  The  storage  history  is  nothing  but  a
communication. So how much product is communicated to the customer. Then another thing
is the convenience factor. How best it is to handle, so in that 4 functions, we will discuss
about the way, food packaging materials.(Refer Slide Time: 5:08)  
The first one is containment. So this is the primary and obvious objective of the packaging is
to contain the product for an efficient transportation and storage and distribution of the
product. As I said earlier, so how you are packaging food preservation technique is different
from  normal  drying  or  freezing  food  preservation  operations.  So  this  is  efficient,  the
containment  that  is  nothing  but  the  package  is  to  contain  the  product  for  efficient
transportation as well as storage and distribution of the product. The containment also allows
repartition of the product into portions of known weight or volume and facilitates stock
keeping and merchandizing. So instead of 1 kg, so it may be to 500 kg product.
So that is also containment. So it allows the repartition of the total product into portions of
known weight or volume and it will be very easy for stock keeping as well as merchandizing.
The shape and dimensions of the package determine largely to the space requirement of the
storage, transportation, and display. So this is based on I mean various factors. So it also
depends  upon  sometimes  serving  quality.  So  here  it  is  basically  given  based  on  the
distributors choice. So the space requirement for the storages. So instead of storing big, big
boxes or big, big product packages. So if we make it smaller ones of known weight and
volume. So then it will be very easy for storage, transportation as well as display. Because we
need not deal with the bulk amount of the product.(Refer Slide Time: 7:00)  
The second important functions packaging is nothing but a protection, preservation. So by
placing a more or less effective barrier between the food and the environment. So this is a
main and important function of the packaging material. So it places a more or less effective
barrier between the food and the environment. The package protects the food from physical,
chemical, microbial, and microbial attack from the exterior and thus has a conclusive effect
on the shelf life of the product.
So this is very much important, it act as a barrier and also it protects the food from outside
like physical, chemical, microbial, and microbial attack from the exterior and thus has a
conclusive effect on the shelf life of the product. It also contributes to increase the shelf life
of the product. The packaging protects the environment from the food as well, it is not always
true, that it acts as an effective barrier between the food and the exterior environment. And it
also protects the exterior environment from the food. How, by preventing the spillage, odour
release, dust, etcetera. 
In thermal processing, the package details the type of processing and vice versa. So this we
have seen, in some of the thermal processing itself. So high-pressure processing should use,
which kind of packaging material and during sterilisation which kind of packaging material
we need to use and during pasteurization which kind of packaging material we need to use.
Aseptic processing, which kind of packaging material we need to use. So it also depends
upon  the  thermal  processing  which  thermal  processing,  we  choose.  So  based  on  that
packaging material has to be decided.(Refer Slide Time: 8:58)  
And it is also true that based on the packaging material we can go for a thermal processing as
well. So then the packaging be it a metal can, or glass jar or plastic pouches, is expected to
prevent contamination of the thermally stabilised to food inside. So normally there are two
ways. One is we first pack the food and go for a thermal processing and other times we also
do the thermal processing, first then fill the can write. So, whatever it may be your packaging
material, whether it is a metal can, or glass jar or plastic pouches. So if the packaging
material  is  of,  is  expected  to  prevent  recontamination.  Once  the  product  is  thermally
stabilised. 
So then the packaging materials  containing  preserving  substances  have been developed,
giving rise to a promising new area known as active packaging. So the recent research or
recent developments in the packaging material is nothing but a active packaging as well as
the modified  atmospheric  technique. So first we will see what is active packaging.  For
example, we told that instead of thermal processing, sometimes to increase the shelf life of
the food there are preservatives used. So during that time, so instead of using the large
amount of, or the required amount of preservative agents directly inside the food.
So these active packaging technique is introduced to have these preservatives in the package
and film itself, and it slowly releases to the product, whenever required or what rate it is
required for the food to acquire the preservatives. So what is active packaging? Active
packaging, the packaging material itself has the preservatives substances. So it releases the
preservative substances to the food product at a given rate and given time. So these are calledactive  packages.  So  the  packaging  material  contains  preservative  substances  have  been
developed giving rise to a promising new area known as active packaging.
And  packaging  materials  with  a  specific  transport  properties  are  the  key  factor  in  the
preservation method known as the modified atmosphere technique. The active packaging
what we told? The preservatives substances kept in the packaging material and it slowly
releases the rate at which the food needs those preservative substances to increase its shelf
life. The same way the transport properties, for example at what rate water vapor should go
inside the food material or at what rate oxygen needs to get inside the food material. So that
also can be designed. So these two are hot areas, one is active packaging another one is
modified atmosphere techniques. So these are the new areas, which is developed in the food
packaging industry.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:16)  
The next one is convenience. So convenience has long been and continues to be among the
chief  selling  attributes  of  the  foods.  So  this  is  very  much  important  as  I  said.  So  the
packaging contributes considerably to the convenience factor, in many ways. One is the
adapting the size of the package to the needs of the particular consumer groups, whether it is
a family size, or individual size, or special sizes for food service delivery. So this we have
seen also. For example, in sauces, ketchups are available in the small, small packs for a
particular serving.
So those are examples, is one of the steps taken by the industry to enhance the product
convenience through the packaging and also we might have seen not only in the food even inthe cosmetic industries. So to travel, to take those products during the travel, there were small
sizes, small size cosmetic items. And certain products might have got very small shelf life,
maybe 1 month only the product can be used. In that case, instead of 5 kg if I buy 1 kg, that
would be of more convenient for the consumer. So in such cases this convenience factor
come into play.
So one example  is  based on the serving need of the  consumer,  it  can  be  design. And
pressurized packaging, so in case of for whipped cream and aerosols for coating, flavouring,
oiling, etcetera. And easy open or re-sealable packages, these are all convenience factor. And
packages which is served as a heating utensils, and as a plates, cups, bowels, etcetera from
which the food can be eaten or drunk directly. So you might have seen this noodles, cup
noodles, we just have to pour the hot water and we can directly eat from the cups itself. So
these kind of packages will come under the category of the convenience factor. So how
convenient the consumer feels when they get these products under those packaging materials.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:32)  
So  then  communications.  So  communication  is  also  another  important  parameter  to  be
considered  while  designing  a  food  packaging  material.  So  this  gives  the  following
information, one is the text and graphics serving the purpose of the food. So it should be
visible and it should be clearly and legibly written. And brand identification, sometimes we
go by brand. And product promotion, so that also appealing to the consumer. And essential
data such as list of ingredients should be printed. And net weight. And nutritional data, so this
we have seen in one of the aseptic processing lecture. I have got the packaging. I think Amulmilk the packaging information I have shown you. The nutritional data, how much vitamin,
how much protein and are all there. And the production date or a limited for selling. So this
comes under shelf life and it is very much important information. So use by date and best
before date.
And price and a barcode. Barcode will help the firm to have an idea about. So which one is
the hot selling product and which one is low selling product and how to arrange and which
needs to be shuffled quite often. Which product to be shuffled quite often, all this information
is you can get from the barcode and it helps mostly the departmental stores to have such
information. And also information needed for product traceability. So, which, warehouse it
was stored and all such information also, one can get from the packaging material. These are
all the information we can get from the data printed on the food packaging materials and also
our food packaging material should be flexible enough to have all this information on it.
And package of chilled foods may carry a time-temperature indicator or integrator that, by its
color, will provide information on probable mishandling of the products during storage and
transportation. So in shelf life studies we have seen these also. So one particular product has
to be stored under freezing conditions whatever mentioned. So if it is not stored for two days,
for  example,  it  has  to  be  stored  for  minus  4  degree  centigrade.  During  storage  and
transportation this particular temperature may not be able to maintain, for 1 or 2 days. So if
this particular product has the time-temperature indicator or integrator.
So that we show by colour, even for the one-day if it is not stored at particular freezing
temperature.  It will show it is  by colour. So in that way, we can identify  whether the
particular product is mishandled or not. So these kind of packaging materials we call it as a
intelligent packaging. So in the packaging material itself, we will insert the time temperature
indicator.  So  if  the  particular  time  temperature  combination  is  not  maintained  for  that
particular product. So it will show by its change in colour. So in that way we can easily
understand.  So  that  particular  product  is  not  stored  at  particular  temperature.  So  this
packaging comes under the category of intelligent packaging. So these are all the recent
research  developments,  active  packaging,  modified  atmosphere  technique  and  intelligent
packaging and everything. (Refer Slide Time: 18:14)  
Then the main consideration of the packaging material is shapes and designs. So the designs
based on the marketing include apparent size, attention drawing power, an impression of the
quality, and clear readability of the brand-name. And semi-grid packaging containers are
shifting gradually towards thin, light, as well as flexible plastics. So earlier days, I think in
canning operations we have also discussed, so how the packaging is changed from the glass
material, then thin material, then we have got aluminium. So everything is based on semi-
rigid into thin, light, and flexible plastics. 
So these are stand-up, flexible pouches, stick packs for unit portion sizes, and easy open and
reclose options. So these thin, light and flexible plastics got a advantage of stick packs for
unit portion sizes. So this I told even ketchup and easy open and reclose options. So that we
have got such kind of seals. And real  need for the packaging  industry to work on the
particular problems in designing packages that deliver microwaved products for a, to the
dining table.
Most of us use microwave to reheat the food. More than cooking the food itself. So in such
case, now, now another search trend in the packaging industry is nothing but to work on the
problems and to design the packaging for the microwave products. So it can be easily put into
the microwave and take it outside and directly put in the dining table, without transferring
any containers, microwaveable containers and to the plate nothing. So like how we use the
noodles with the just pour the hot water and so from the packaging material itself. So thesame way how we can use the food packaging material for microwave products. So that is a
another research development in the packaging.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:29)  
So the critical aspect of microwaveable ready to eat meals is the safe release of internal steam
buildup in packages during preparation. So we also know that most of the products contains
the water. Most of the food materials and also for the microwave to pass, it has to be a polar
molecule.  So, in such  case, mostly  the  microwave  product should be  having  the  water
quantity. So when you will microwave it, so these water gets changes into steam. So then
there is a steam buildup inside the packaging material. So microwaveable prepare foods are
engineered to be reheated in achieving serving temperatures in microwave ovens. So these
microwaveable  prepared  foods  are  engineered  to  be  reheated  in  achieving  serving
temperature in the microwave ovens. So these we already know, instead of cooking most of
the time we use it for reheating. 
So the microwave energy penetrates the food and generate the steam, which, if under pressure
during opening, could injure or steam under pressure could expand and explode the package
in the microwave oven itself. So as we said, so most of the time we use it for reheating. So
the water inside the food material gets change into steam upon microwave heating. And the
steam buildup happens inside the packaging. So if you open the package with steam buildup,
because that is a serving temperature. So that is the main aim, I am heating the food material
in the microwave. So when such steam buildup happens inside the packaging material, when
we reopen so it can injure us or sometimes if the pressure is so high inside the pouches. Thenit may explode or expand as well. So this particular problem to be handle in the food
packaging industry during design of microwaveable food packaging materials.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:31)  
The internal pressure may be relieved by a weak heat seal that fractures from excess teams
pressure  during microwave  steam,  steam  generation  or the  incorporation  of  shrink  film
covered vent valves that melt or otherwise fail as a result of steam pressure. So in the
microwaveable  package  they  will  put  a  one  particular  vent  valve.  So,  which  has  the
shrinkable, shrinkable package. So when the steam buildup happens inside, so this shrinkable
package, this shrinkable film will shrink and it will open and it releases the steam. So that
kind of design also tried for the microwaveable food packaging material.
Development of laser scored or perforated weakness in the film, which fail from internal
steam pressure and release the steam in the microwave oven. So one problem in this kind of
shrink film covered, vent valve or weak heat seals is. So when the steam buildup is happening
it releases. So it fails to withstand the steam buildup and it rapture and that is way your steam
is escaping. So this is almost equivalent to the blow up of your food packaging material. 
But it happens in certain places where we design. But still instead of this kind of either weak
heat seal mechanism or shrink film covered vent valves. So there is a latest trend where we
create our laser scored or perforated weakness in the film. So through which the steam
releases. So, in such case, so there will not be any further re-contamination as well. Because
these laser holds will not be that micro level. So that the re-contamination occurs further.Sufficiently precise to be able to produce micro perforations or partial depth cuts that remain
intact  during  distribution  and  early  heating  and  fail  only  under  steam  pressure  during
cooking. So it happens only the steam pressure during cooking. But these micro perforations
or partial depth cuts that remain intact during distribution. For example, whatever we have
designed as a weak heat seal mechanism or shrink film covered vent valves. So during
distribution also, there may be our chances, if there is a force applied on that particular
places. There may be rapture can occur, so at that particular place. But this kind of laser
perforations that problem is not that. And also compared to this weak heat seal or shrink film
covered vent valves. So your laser perforation will have less possible reconsideration.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:30)  
And  many  materials  act  as  a  microwave  reflector  and  microwave  absorbent.  So  a
multicomponent meal may consist of food items that needs to be heated at different rates in
the microwave. So sometimes the food material contains multicomponent, so each has to be
heated at different rates. For example if you have a vitamins or sometimes you can have a
material with nuts. So solid as well as liquid material, solid has to be heated at different rate
than the liquid. So in such cases we need to take care of these micro sensitive food items. So
they can be shielded using a particular shielding material. So that is what it is given.
A multicomponent mail may consist of food items that needs to be heated at different rates in
the microwave. The more microwave sensitive food items can be shielded, so that the entire
meal can be heated more evenly. So one has to heated for almost 5 minutes and another has
to be heated for 1 minute in the multicomponent meal. So after 1 minute, so these food itemscan be shielded in the mean. So that every component gets heated at the proper rate. So
aluminium is often use as a selectively shield microwaves from certain areas or locations of
the food. So this also we have discuss about, the metals mostly act as a waveguide. So they
can, they have this property of selectively shield microwaves from certain areas or locations
of the food.
Aluminium is also used as an electromagnetic field modifier. This is where we told as a
waveguide and to redirect the microwave energy. It can intensify the microwave energy
locally or redirect it to the places in package, for example, microwave energy can be directed
from the edges to the centre. So instead of having it in the edges, so it can redirect the
microwave energy into the centre. So this we have discussed in the microwave heating itself,
many metals can be used as a waveguide, for the microwave heating.
So here in this particular slide, what we are discussing is some microwave reflector as well as
absorbent. So reflector is nothing but a it reflects the microwave into certain parts of the food
material. So if my food material has multicomponent meal and each one of them has to be
heated at different rates. Then I can use the selective shielding packaging material to make
sure that certain areas or locations of the food is not heated at the same rate, where other
locations of the food materials are heated. So once such shielding material is aluminium.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:31)  
And foil components should be receded from the edge of the packaging to avoid arcing with
the oven walls, so microwave oven walls. So this arcing is nothing but due to electromagnetic
waves there may be a shock. So the electric arc can be produce. So this foil components,should be receded from the edge of the packaging to avoid arcing with the oven walls.
Necessary to test the packaged product to ensure that the package is safe to use. So those is
common for all the packaging. And the major purpose of the susceptors, there is something
called susceptors. So they are used to generate surface heating to mimic the browning or
crisping ability of the conventional oven.
So the susceptors are the microwave observants, like microwave reflector or the metals. So
one such example, we have seen is aluminium. So these susceptor materials are to generate
surface heating to mimic the browning or crisping ability, what we get in conventional oven.
So they are available in the different forms, so such as flat pads, sleeves, and pouches in
various patterns, such as portions of the metallized layers that are deactivated. So what we
can do here is so based on the where you wanted to create such a kind of surface heating. So
there we can use really as a susceptors and in other portions or other locations of the food
material, it can be deactivated. So that, that particular portion or the location of the food is not
heated further.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:14)  
Then sometimes the packaging can be of many levels. So one is primary packaging, is the
package in direct contact with the food material. The primary package is the package in
which a unit of the product is presented to the retail market. So a can of oil, so your food is
directly in contact with the can, and a bag of peanuts, so peanuts bags and a jar of jam, and
wrap around a chocolate candy. So where in all the examples, so your food product is directly
in contact with the packaging material.A number of primary packages are usually contained in an outer or secondary package for
transportation, storage, and delivery. So we might have seen some biscuit packet. So in case
of a biscuits in a cotton box containing say, 5 or 6 individual pouches of biscuits. So one
secondary packaging will be the, so inside we have 5, 6 small packages. So those were
primary packages, they are directly in contact to the food. So these 5 or 6 small, small
pouches  can be put together  in  the  carton  box. So this  carton  box is  called  secondary
packages. A number of secondary packages may be collated into lot contained in a tertiary
package, so this goes on. So based on that, but primary is nothing but with the one which is in
direct contact the food.
(Refer Slide Time: 31:42)  
So materials used for packaging foods belong to the any one of the category, that may be a
metals,  glass,  paper,  and  polymers.  And  sometimes  what  happens  this  is  where  that
composite  film  came  into  existence.  So  sometimes  to  modify  certain  properties  of  the
packaging material, these can be combined as well. So the enameled or lacquered metal or
laminates formed by binding together layers of polymer, paper, aluminium foil. So this we
have seen as a tertiary packaging, tertiary packaging. So sometimes the enameled metal and
the laminates formed by the binding together layers of polymer, paper, and aluminium foil
are common examples of such composite materials. So this is where the composite materials
came into existence.
So the chemical composition and physical properties of the packaging materials determine
their ability to fulfil the various functions expected from the packaging. So whether it is ourmechanical property or optical property or their chemical inertness, or the barrier properties.
So everything decided by the chemical composition and physical properties of the packaging
material.  The  most  important  properties  to  be  considered  in  this  context  is  transport
properties, we call it as a, barrier properties, barrier properties. So other than that optical is
there, mechanical is there, chemical reactivity is there. So what we are going to see todays in
the case of mechanical and transport properties only.
(Refer Slide Time: 33:24)  
And first one is the metals. So they got certain advantages, so they are having superior
mechanical strength, impermeability to mass transfer as well as light, optical properties, as
well as the barrier property and good thermal conductivity and resistance to relatively high
temperature. So this takes care of whatever we the aim of the course, so thermal processing.
So that is where the metals are a best food packaging materials for thermal processing or
food.  So  they  have  got  good  thermal  conductivity  and  resistance  to  relatively  high
temperature.
The tinplate, it was the 1st material used to make a metal cans, this I have discussed in the
canning operations itself. And consist of a thin sheet of steel, coated with tin to reduce the
risk of corrosion. So they are a thin sheet of steel, so about which the tin is coated and to
avoid the corrosion process. Advanced metallurgical processes have led to the production of
steel plate with improved mechanical properties, but with strongly reduced thickness. So now
we are able to use very thin sheets . Because the amount of coating, the thickness of the
coating what we do it on the steel as well as the thickness of the sheet also got its own effectsin the food packaging material. So with the advanced metallurgical process, we are able to
produce  the  steel  plate  with  improved  mechanical  properties  with  it  strongly  reduced
thicknesses.
(Refer Slide Time: 35:01)  
The traditional methods for quoting the steel plates with tin is a hot dip method. So now has
been replaced by the process of electrolytic deposition. So with this electrolytic deposition we
can go up to minimum thickness. Which we could not achieve using a hot dip method. So the
electrolytic process of tinplating forms a more uniform tin coat with much less tin per unit
area.  So  that  is  what  we  could  achieve  minimum  thickness  whatever  we  aimed  for,
production of lighter as well as less expensive cans with improved performance. So lighter
can, so due to less thickness and because we are using less tin material per unit area, the cost
also reduced.
In some cases, where the can is to face the particularly severe corrosive conditions. So even
though we coated with tin but still the corrosive property or the corrosion conditions are not
achieved to the minimum level, whatever we wanted. A protective layer of polymeric lacquer
or enamel is applied on the tin. So more than above the tin, there is a protective layer of
polymeric enamel as well, is applied, so to reduce the corrosion further more. So can sizes are
standardized and specified using standard dimensions. So this also we have discussed in the
canning operations. So 3 naught 7 into 4 naught 9 can, so we call it as a number 2 can, would
thus measure 3 and 7 upon 16 inch in diameter by 4 and 9 upon 16 inch in height with the
capacity of 0.58 L. So if we say number 2 can this is the standard dimension.(Refer Slide Time: 37:00)  
The selection, of the most suitable can for a given application, involves specification of the
steel base, the thickness of the tin layer, and the type of enamel where applicable. So if you
need better corrosion properties, so this enamel is also applied and special features of the can
geometry. So the selection of any suitable metal cans, so based on these properties, one is
specification of the steel base and the thickness of the tin layer. So if enamel has to be applied
for more or better corrosion properties. So that type of enamel as well as the special features
of the can geometry. So then after that initially the steel with tin coated or enamel coated
were used as a metal food packaging material. Then after that aluminium got into the metal
food packaging industry.
The aluminium does not require the application of the protective coat, because thin film of
aluminium  oxide  formed  on  the  surface  protects  the  metal  against  further  corrosion by
oxygen. So that means, so when the aluminium is interacting with the oxygen it forms the
aluminium oxide film. So that acts as a protective layer against the further corrosion. But
these aluminium is and mild acids, but it is attacked by the alkali. So these aluminium oxide
protective layer can protect the aluminium metal food packaging material by oxygen and
mild acids, but alkali seems to be attacking this aluminium food packaging material. So this
is much lighter element and more ductile than that of tinplate, but it is more expensive. So
that is another disadvantage of using aluminium. So aluminium cans are used mainly for beer
and soft beverages. Aluminium foils are used as a laminates.(Refer Slide Time: 39:09)  
The next one is glass, so in the food packaging industrial mostly used are soda lime glass. So,
which typically got 68 to 73 percent a silicon oxide and 12 to 15 percentage Na2O sodium
oxide, so this is silicon dioxide and 10 to 13 percentage of CaO calcium oxide and other
oxides  in  lesser  proportion.  So  the  glass  is  used  are  soda  lime  glass.  Advantages,
transparency, inertness, impermeability, rigidity, thermal resistance when properly heated,
and general consumer appeal, and reused or recycled. So here bit need to be careful because
the reusing may recontaminate. But recycling seems to be a less expensive process, because it
will be melted again moulded into particular shape. And disadvantage is fragility and weight
because it is not a lightweight material. And standardized to a much lesser degree than metal
cans.  So  most  bottles  and  jars  are  tailor  made  specifically  for  one  product  or  one
manufacturer.  So  it  is  not  like  generalised  dimensions.  So  based  on  product  or  the
manufacturer, so it is a tailor made.(Refer Slide Time: 40:34)  
The next one is paper, advantages are low-cost, wide availability, low weight, printability,
mechanical  strength,  etcetera.  So  this  also  I  told,  so  one  of  the  major  functions  to  be
considered when we use the food packaging material. And disadvantages wise sensitivity to
moisture; can be modified. But this also cannot be considered as a directly disadvantages,
because this disadvantages can be modified through the composition of the pulp, and the
manufacturing process, and various surface treatments.
So these are maybe instead of high moisture sensitivity. If we take care of the composition of
the pulp as well as the manufacturing processes and various surface treatments, so it will be
possible  to  have  less  moisture  sensitive  paper  packaging  material.  The  permeability  to
moisture and fat can be reduced by coating with wax. So these are all called waxed paper
food  packaging  materials.  So  there  is  a  coating  with  the  wax,  so  it  takes  care  of  the
permeability of moisture or fat into the packaging material. Paper is an important components
of the laminated packaging materials and is used as a primary package boxes, wraps, and
pouches. Principal material used for secondary packaging corrugated cardboard boxes and
cartons. So it can be used for direct food contact as well and also it can be a primary material
in secondary packaging as well.(Refer Slide Time: 42:07)  
So the most important and the growing food packaging industry uses the polymer as a food
packaging material. Most important class of packaging materials, both for food as well as
non-food applications. So polymeric materials are fairly varied and versatile. And they can be
made flexible or rigid, transparent or opaque, and thermosetting or thermoplastic and fairly
crystalline or practically amorphous. So we can have variety is as well as these are versatile
packaging material.
And produced as films or as containers of many shapes and sizes, so there also we have got
variety. And much less expensive than the metal or glass and certainly much lighter than
other packaging material. Remarkably suitable for the application of advanced packaging
technologies, one is modified atmosphere, active and intelligent packing. So this I told recent
developments.  So  this  is  the  APT  material  for  it  to  be  used  as  a  advanced  packaging
technologies, whether it is a MAP or modified atmosphere packaging or active packaging or
intelligent packaging.(Refer Slide Time: 43:14)  
So unlike metal or glass, polymer permeable to small molecules to greater or lesser extent. So
this also can be varied because the intelligent packaging or active packaging has that only.
Intelligent packaging have the sensor property in it, but active as well as modified packaging,
the aim is to control the rate of any material diffusion or the permeability, so for that, this is
the APT packaging material. The two consequences are permeability of the package to gases
and vapors, particularly to oxygen and water vapor. The another thing is migration of low
molecular weight substances from the package to the food or from the food to the packaging
material. So the two consequences, because we told that metal or glass are impermeable. But
polymers has got a permeability property. Unlike metal or glass polymers are permeable to
small molecules to a greater or lesser extent.
So that means the rate can be varied in the polymeric materials. So, which rate? The small
molecules penetration rate or permeability rate can be varied in the polymer material. So the
consequences is, the permit ability of the packaged to gases or vapors. So the gases and
vapors, mostly water vapor and oxygen. And migration of low molecular weight substances
from the packaging to the food. So this is also important because the polymers what we use
as a package material, if it gets direct contact with the food material. So sometimes there may
be a possibility for migration of low molecular weight substances from the packaging to the
food. So examples are monomers or stabilizers or plasticizers, plasticisers we use it to have
the flexible, flexibility for elongation purpose. So there may be a chance for this substancesto permeate from the packaging material to the food. And the vice a versa also happens,
sometimes from the food to the packaging material. So those were aroma components.
And  mostly,  packaging  plastics  are  made  of  synthetic  polymers  and  there  are  natural
polymers is also. So those were cellulosic, cellulose material based, so those were natural
polymers. But most of the packaging plastics are made from synthetic polymers. Chemically,
they vary in monomers forming the polymer chain, in their molecular weight and in the
structure of the chain. Whether it is linear or branched, or cross-linked, etcetera. So they
mainly classified based on the polymeric chain and also the molecular weight of the material
and structure of the chain, whether it is a linear or branched or cross-linked.
(Refer Slide Time: 46:16)  
So the most important polymer which are used as a packaging material is polyethylene. So
this you already aware of LDPE, HDPE, MDPE and LLDPE. So this is nothing but low-
density polyethylene. So the polyethylene has got this particular molecular structure, so it is
nothing but C2H4. So this is arranged in that N number of units. So they are highly branched
polymers with the branches consisting of short or long side chains. And short chains impart to
the  material,  some  crystallinity  while  long  chains  are  responsible  for  the  viscoelastic
properties of the molten polymer. And they have got really low melting range 105 to 115
degree centigrade, which allows it is used as the heat sealable layer in the laminates. So this
we have discussed few slides earlier, so the heat sealable layer.
And HDPE is nothing but high-density polyethylene materials, so they are linear polymer
with little branching and more crystalline than LDPE, low-density because the high-density isdue to the crystalline nature of the polymer. And hence more rigid and less transparent.
HDPE you cannot see, so they got a property of less transparent. And it is melting ranges
nothing but 128 to 138 degree. So by increasing its linear chain, then the branching, so we
can make low-density to high-density polyethylene. So medium density polyethylene, are in
between the LDPE and HDPE. And LLDPE is nothing but a linear LDPE. So that means the
co-polymer of ethylene with a small quantities of higher olefins and has a branches at regular
intervals in the main chain. It is not like total branches, so it has a branches at regular
intervals in the main chain. So these are stronger than LDPE and are better heat sealable
component.
(Refer Slide Time: 48:24)  
The next one is polypropylene, so they have got methyl group in their branch chain. Polymer
of the olefin propylene and it has got one methyl side chain group attached to the chain per
monomer unit. Due to the asymmetry of the carbon to which the side group is attached. The
polypropylene can assume difference spatial conflagrations, resulting in different mechanical
and transport properties. So because of this methyl group, so it gives the asymmetric nature to
the carbon. So because of which we can get different spatial configurations. And due to
which we can also get different mechanical and transport properties. So they got high melting
range 160 to 178 degree centigrade, it can also withstand thermal sterilization.(Refer Slide Time: 49:13)
So other polymers are polystyrene. So they can be used in the production of thermoformed
trays and recipients and disposable cups and dishes. And PET jars so this we are very much
known polyester  of terephthalic  acid  and  ethylene  glycol;  so they  have  got mechanical
strength,  low  probability,  transparency,  and  thermal  stability.  And  extensively  used,  or
particularly in the manufacture of beverage bottles and retortable pouches. And saran, so this
is the commercial name of copolymer of vinyl chloride and vinyl dichloride. So it has got
excellent barrier properties. So as a film it is known as the familiar saran wrap. And ethylene
vinyl alcohol copolymers, so we call it as EVOH, so they also got excellent barriers to gases,
but their barrier properties are weakened under the action of water vapor is the absorbed by
virtue of their hydrophilic composition. 
So this EVOH are excellent barriers to gases, but they have got this hydrophilic composition
because of which they have got excellent permeability to water vapor. They are mainly used
as a barrier layer in composite laminates, composite laminates. So they can be used for
excellent barriers  for gases and their affinity towards a water vapor can be reduced by
designing proper composite laminates along with EVOH. And cellophane as I told earlier, so
they are made from the cellulosic materials. So they are transparent and has got good barrier
properties to gases, but it is mechanical stability and barrier properties are greatly weakened
by the moisture. So that we know, cellulose did not get good barrier against the moisture. It
has  the  advantage  of  being  easily  biodegradable.  So  this  is  another  advantage.  Andcellophane is generic name apply to many transparent films, even if they are not made up of
cellulose.
(Refer Slide Time: 51:20)  
So the transport properties wise glass and metals are particularly impermeable to gases and
vapors,  so  they  can  provide  an  efficient  barrier  against  the  material  exchange  between
atmosphere inside the package and the environment. So we have already told the classes and
metals are impermeable to gases and vapors. And so they can provide efficient barrier against
the  material  exchange  between  the  food  inside  the  package  and  as  well  as  the  outside
environment. 
But polymers and paper are permeable to gases and vapors to various degrees and their
barrier properties certainly constitute a chief criterion from the estimation of their suitability
to serve as packaging materials in the given application. So based on the food material which
is packed inside the packaging material. So the rate of the permeation of gases as well as the
water vapor can be varied for these packaging material, which are nothing but a polymers and
papers.
So gases and vapors may pass through packaging barriers either by molecular diffusion or by
flow through holes and pores. But this we are not going to discuss because that is not of our
interest because if we have holes and pores, so that may act as a re-contamination. So what
we are discussing about here as a transport properties are gases and vapors may pass to the
packaging barriers by molecular diffusions. So we are not going to discuss anything about the
flow-through holes or pores.(Refer Slide Time: 52:57)  
So the permeation has got three levels, one is the dissolution or adsorption of the permeant on
one face of the film. So it has got the three components the dissolution or adsorption of the
permeant on one face of the film. Then molecule diffusion through the film and desorption on
the opposite face. So the behavior of the many penetrant-barrier couple is characterized by
means of a parameter called permeability or we call it as a permeability coefficient. So
penetrant  is nothing but a water vapor or gas. So the barrier is nothing but your food
packaging material, food packaging material. So the behavior of the penetrant barrier couple
is characterized by means of a parameter known as permeability or permeability coefficient.
And one thing we should remember here is the relative humidity of the air outside the
package is maintained at constant pressure. So even then the incoming water vapor will alter
the P2, P2 is nothing but a pressure inside the packaging that is partial pressure inside the
packaging, partial pressure inside the packaging. So what it is told, even if the relative
humidity of the air outside the package is maintained constant. So that means the partial
pressure outside the packaging is maintained constant. The incoming water vapor will alter
P2, which is nothing but a partial pressure inside the packaging.
At a rate that will be determined by the volume of the air, which is coming inside and the
mass of biscuits in the package. So this is nothing but a food product, the mass of the biscuit
is in the package, as well as the sorption isotherm of the biscuits. So that is nothing but a food
material.  So  this  is  told  as  an  example.  So  whatever  we  are  going  to  derive  font  a
permeability  or  permeability  coefficient  is  under  steady-state.  But  in  normal  practicalsituation.  So,  even  though  we  maintain  the  constant  relative  humidity  outside  of  the
packaging by maintaining the partial pressure as constant. The incoming water vapor will
alter the partial pressure inside the packaging as well as the rate at which volume of the air is
coming inside as well as the mass of the foods in the packaging, as well as the sorption
isotherms, sorption isotherm in the sense the rate at which it acquires the moisture. So that
also important.
The diffusivity and solubility are the 2 main properties which has to be considered, while
considering the transport properties. We always talked about the permeability, permeability,
but it has got 2 components, one is diffusivity and solubility. So this is got two consequences
of high permeability of hydrophilic films, so the example is nothing but a cellophane. So high
permeability, so they have got high permeability to gases of hydrophilic films. So that means
they have also got high moisture content because hydrophilic. So example is cellophane to
water vapor. And low permeability of hydrophobic films to water vapor, low permeability in
the sense, so they have got low permeability, but they are the hydrophobic films. So example
is polyethylene. So these 2 categories are determined by the properties of diffusivity as well
as solubility.
(Refer Slide Time: 56:53)  
So if we see the model, so this is my packaging material. So this is the film near the
packaging material. So here we have got P1 which is nothing but a partial pressure of, partial
pressure of gas component G. So from here, this is a bulk. So it has got into the CA1, so then
it further reduce to CA2, so this is nothing but P2. So this is other side of the film. So this ispackaging  film,  so  this  is  partial  pressure  of  the  gas  component  G.  So  here  it  is  a
concentration CA1 and this is CA2, so this is a packaging material. So we consider the case
of P1 is  greater  than  P2. So this  has  got 3 components  we said, one is  adsorption  or
dissolution of G in the film material in plane 1. So this particular portion. Then the second
one is diffusion and molecular diffusion of G from plane 1 to plane 2. So then the third
component  is  desorption,  so  that  is  where  the  concentration  here  is  increased.  So  the
desorption of G from film at plane 2.
So we might of studied Henry’s law. So what Henry’s law says? Equilibrium concentration
of the component G in the film material is proportional to its partial pressure. So the G here
represents the gases as well as water vapor, gases or. So this is a concentration is proportional
to the partial pressure. So the proportionality constant we can say it as a solubility. So S here
is nothing but a solubility. So you can make the concentration by using a ideal gas law. So
this I can take it as one example. So, P is equal, P by RT is nothing but N by V. So this is
number of moles upon volume, so this has got the molar density unit.
So, which is nothing but a concentration. So from using the EOS, equation of state, you can
calculate the concentration from the pressure given. So the C equal to S into P, so S into P.
Where S is a solubility, P is a partial pressure, C is a concentration. So from Henry’s law, so
in earlier classes, we have told at steady-state. So any flux, so I can any flux, so here I will
put JG, so the component flux. So that can be written as the gradient upon resistance. So what
is  a gradient here? So this  is CA1 minus  CA2 so that is nothing but my gradient.  So
resistance is nothing but Z upon diffusivity of the G. So Z is nothing but a thickness of this
packaging material in the direction of transfer.(Refer Slide Time: 62:12)  
So what we got, so JG is nothing but CA1 minus CA2 upon Z upon DG. So what Z? Z is
nothing but a thickness and DG is nothing but diffusivity, or we can call it as a diffusion
coefficient. So now I am going to write C in terms of solubility as well as, so this can be
taken above. So the C I can write it in terms of solubility into partial pressure. So PA1 minus
PA2 upon Z. So this we call it as a solubility, solubility of gas in the film material, diffusion
coefficient of gas in the film material. What is JG? So this is nothing but flux of gas through
the film of packaging material. So if we want to combine so we can combine as pi into P1
minus P2 upon Z. So this we call it as a pi, which is nothing but a permeability. 
So this has got a unit of Kg per metre second Pascal. So not only this unit, it has also if you
want to define in terms of mass then it has got Kg metre square second Pascal. So if we
defines in terms of volume, so this is got a unit of metre cube per metre, so metre square
second Pascal. So based on which unit we takes, so it also varies. So, for example here the
pressure unit is taken as a Pascal and for example volume, if you take so that is in centimeters
cube or metre cube at STP, standard temperature and pressure conditions.
So for O2, N2 and CO2. So if we are considering water vapor, so we consider mass and in
grams for water vapor, for water vapor. So area is considered in centimeters square or metre
square, time is considered in seconds or hours or day. So pressure is considered in mm HG or
bars and thickness, mostly we will not get, thickness will be of an millimeter or micrometer,
there will not be any metre this thing. And as per the ASTM standard so the permeability isdefined as a 1 bearer. So 1 bearer has got 10 to the power of minus 11 centimeter cube STP
upon CM square second MMHG into CM.
So this is the ASTM standard of a 1 bearer. So this permeability based on which unit you take
for volume, mass, area, time, so it depends. So here we calculated the flux which is nothing
but JG is equivalent to pi into PA1, which is nothing but partial pressure of the gas at plane 1
and PA2, which is nothing but a partial pressure of the gas in the plane 2 and divided by Z. Z
is nothing but a thickness and pi got permeability. So that is based on many units. So this is
all about the how we calculate the transport properties. So here we use the Henry’s law for a
simple model that is all. But here, this is what I told, we calculate the flux at steady-state. So
most of the time in the practical situation. So it depends upon the rate at which the volume of
the air is getting inside and mass of the food material in the package and the sorption
isotherm of the food materials okay.
(Refer Slide Time: 68:00)  
So normally the permeability of films to water vapor is usually expressed as water vapor
transmission  rate,  which  is  nothing  but  WVTR,  which  is  the  quantity  of  water  vapor
transmitted per unit area and unit time, by a film of unit thickness, under specified conditions
of vapor pressure difference and temperature. So under specified conditions of vapor pressure
difference and temperature. So how much quantity of water vapor transmitted per unit area,
per unit time is nothing but a water vapor transmission rate by which the permeability of
films against the water vapor is defined.So  traditionally,  the  standard  specific  conditions  are  taken  as  a  90  percentage  relative
humidity, 90 or H at 37.8 degree centigrade. The units of quantity, area, time, and the film
thickness may vary. So as we told earlier, so volume can be represented in centimeter cube,
metre cube and your time will be expressed in seconds, hour, etcetera. So here for the
reference there are two, permeability to oxygen and permeability to water vapor is given for
low-density polyethylene LDPE as well as PVA polyvinyl alcohol.
So permeability to oxygen that LDPE got permeability to oxygen of around 2400 to 3000
centimeter cube MIL 100 per inch square day power minus 1. But at the same time, it has got
permeability to water vapor as a 10 to 18 gram per metre square per day at 40 degree
centigrade and 90 percentage relative humidity. So that means it has got good permeability to
water vapor, but not against the oxygen.
(Refer Slide Time: 69:54)
So the data clearly shows that some polymers example polyethylene, are excellent barriers to
water vapor, but quite permeable to oxygen while opposite is true for others. So other one is
what we have seen here is PVOH. So that is nothing but an exactly opposite, so it has got less
permeability towards oxygen. But it is permeable to water vapor. So in that case, these 2
properties can be combined together, one has got excellent permeability properties against
oxygen, other has got excellent permeability properties against the water vapor. So this can
be combined and formed as a composite material. So that is what is all about our next lecture.
So  the  improved  barrier  properties  can  be  achieved  by  binding  together  or  laminating
together films of various materials, each with a different probability profile. So both thesolubility and diffusivity are independent of the concentration of the permeant, most of the
time because this is SG and this is DG. So this together, we call it as a permeability. 
The permeability of polymer films to low molecular weight gases is, indeed, a particularly
independent of the concentration. So, which is nothing but a partial pressure of the permeant,
permeant is nothing but gases or water vapor. But condensable vapors and liquids that can
alter the structure of the polymer, for example, by swelling and plasticizing. So what we told
the both celebrity as well as the diffusivity are independent of the concentration of the
permeant. So concentration of the gases or water vapor, but sometimes what happens in case
of condensable vapors and liquids they can alter the structure of the polymer, for example, by
swelling it or by plasticizing it.
(Refer Slide Time: 71:56)  
So  interactive  permeant  may  affect  the  probability  of  the  film  to  other  permeants.  For
example, the permeability of nylon 6 to oxygen is 50 times higher at 100 percentage relative
humidity than in the bonedry gas. So if nylon 6 to oxygen, nylon 6 here is nothing but a
packaging material, packaging material. So this packaging material to oxygen is 50 times
higher at 100 percentage relative humidity than in bonedry gas. So that means if oxygen is
bonedry gas, so it has got very less permeable. But if it is 100 percentage relative humidity
the permeability of nylon 6 to oxygen is nothing but 50 times higher than that. So that means,
so the interactive permeant may affect the permeability of the film to the other permeants.
So the permeability of a hydrophobic films such as polyethylene is not affected by humidity
at all. And barrier properties of polymer films are dictated by their molecular structure aswell. And relationships between structural features and permeability. So also affects the
permeability of the material which is nothing but cross-linking, higher crystallinity of the
packaging material, high glass transition temperature, and inertness to the permeant result in
lower permeability. So inertness to the permeant result in lower permeability.
(Refer Slide Time: 73:38)  
The next one is mechanical  properties. So these mechanical  properties,  also very much
important.  So  this  gives  the  packaging  to  protect  its  content  against  the  external  force
depends on its mechanical properties. So they should be considered and evaluated at the level
of packaging material, as well as, actually there are different levels, so it has to be tested
under empty condition, and product package assembly, and also outer packages. This has to
be tested at various levels. 
The mechanical strength of cans depends on the size and structure of the can and thickness of
the tinplate. So the mechanical properties depends upon for metal packaging material, it
depends upon its size, structure, as well as thickness. And equal tinplate thickness, the cans
with smaller diameters are mechanically stronger. The side walls of the cans are beaded to
increase the mechanical strength. So this we have discussed in the canning operations itself.
So drawing process. So that brings the mechanical strength to the cans or metal packaging
films.(Refer Slide Time: 74:48)
Except for the integrity and stability of the closure, the mechanical strength of the glass is not
an issue. And relatively high output rates  with minimal  breakage can be achieved with
adequately designed handling and conveying equipment with proper surface treatment to
provide lubricity and prevents scratches. So how we can improve mechanical properties in
the glasses, so by using adequately designed handling. Because it is breakable, fragile and
conveying equipment and also with proper surface treatment to provide lubricity and to
prevent the scratches.
And paper or particularly corrugated cardboard used for outer packaging must be tested for
its mechanical strength. And strength of the paper is strongly influenced by the moisturecontent, and paper packages must be conditioned at known humidity before testing. So the
testing is important. So normally for mechanical properties, they do testing at empty level,
empty packaging level and product packaging assembly, as well as the outer packaging.
But in the mechanical or metal cans, so we do not have much problem. So the main factors to
be considered are the size and structure of the metals, metals, food packaging materials and
its thickness. And when we considered the glass, then we need to be care about or considered
about  the handling  and  the conveying  equipment  and also any surface  treatment  which
provided for lubricity and scratches.
And paper or the outer packaging material, they also must be tested for the mechanical
strength. And the strength of the paper is strongly influenced by the moisture content. So it
has to be tested at known humidity level for enhancement or for checking the mechanical
properties So with this I will end this lecture. So if some material has got good barrier
property against oxygen and less barrier property against other water vapor. So how do we
combine such material to achieve the aim of the less or high, so it based on the food material.
So how do we combine such materials and to form a particular goal or particular aim of the
packaging material. So that is what we are going to discuss is a bio nano composite films.
(Refer Slide Time: 77:30)  
So these are references I have used in this particular lecture. So we will see in next class.
Thank you.