Thermal Processing of Foods 
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Department of Chemical Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati 
Lecture 30
Regulatory Considerations 
Good morning everyone. So, in the last class we have discussed about what are all the sanitation
regulatory agencies are available and standards are available and after that we have also seen
about the various food contacting surfaces, what are all the sanitation requirements they must
fulfill and non-contacting food surfaces are as well. So, today we are going to see about the
regulatory considerations  which are followed or which requires  to be followed in the food
processing industry and also safety requirements for the of food.
So, first we will discuss about the regulatory considerations in India and even though these
regulatory considerations are vary country to country. There are international food laws that has
to  be  complied  for  all  the  countries  which  are  involved  in  food  processing  and  food
manufacturing and food import and export so that also we are going to see about. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:50)
The first one we are going to talk about the current scenario in India. So, in India the Food Safety
and Standard Authority of India which is nothing but FSSAI is the apex food regulator and it is
empowered by the functions under Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India.So, this particular Food Safety and Standards Authority of India is empowered by Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Government of India and also it functions under the same ministry. 
So, this FSSAI implements and enforces the food regulations as prescribed in the Food Safety
and Standards Act, 2006 so we call it as a FSS Act. So, this Act is an Act of Parliament and
popularly known as the Food Act.So, this FSSAI implements and enforces the food regulations
as prescribed by the Food Safety Standards Act so which is nothing but FSS Act and this Act is
an Act of Parliament in India and which is popularly known as Food Act.
So, the number of food legislations have been consolidated in the FSS Act and became effective
in 2011 with FSSAI as its regulatory body. And though Act continues to evolve, it needs further
harmonized with the standards of international agencies for global parity so this is what I told.
So, though we are  saying that  the  FSSAI is  the  regulatory  body for the  Food Safety and
Standards in India. So, in the Act also intermittently amended with a certain modifications to
further harmonize with the standards of international agencies as per with the global scenario.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:56) 
And FSSAI standardized 380 articles of food in 16 categories and any other food requires the
product approval if they are not listed among these 380 food items. So, this is the scenario about
2015 and there is a another amendment in the 2017 so that is implemented from January first
2018 onwards. So, till then the FSSAI standardized almost 380 articles of food in almost 16categories and if any other food which requires the product approval which is not standardized
already. 
So, if they are not listed so under these standardized food items they need a special approval. The
standardized food products are those for which standards are prescribed and do not require any
product  approval  prior to manufacture,  sale,  distribution  or import.  So, if any  of the food
products are listed among these 380 articles of food in 16 categories they do not require a
product approval prior to manufacture, sale, distribution or import. 
So, the first time manufacturer or importer of standardized food so which is already there in
FSSAI only requires an FSSAI license to begin a food business. So, they do not require the
product approval but the same time the non-standardized food products do not have standards as
their safety parameters or either not known or not yet ascertained. So, there may be of new food
items or new food formulations so they do not come under the already listed standardized food
under FSSAI.
So, there may be two reasons for that, one is they come up with the new of food formulation or
not yet ascertained. For the new food formulations there may not be any safety parameters which
is already known or they are not yet ascertained. So, FSSAI works to standardized more foods in
harmonization with Codex Alimentarius. So, this I talked about in the sanitary requirements
itself, 
So, this we are going to see what it is, So, this is the international agency. So, as of now in the
sense before this last amendment around 2015. So, FSSAI standardized almost 380 articles. So,
the  standardized  and  non-standardized  food  items  came  into  existence  based  on  this
standardization of articles under FSSAI. So, standardized food means so they are already they
are their safety parameters and their formulation and their level RDA they call it as. 
So, recommended dietary allowances, so all the information were listed in the FSSAI. So, in
such case those standardized food items do not require any prior permission or prior product
approval for manufacture, sale, distribution or import. If the products are not listed under this
FSSAI category so then they need a product approval before the license. So, that means their
safety parameters are either not known or not yet ascertained. So, already if the food item is standardized under FSSAI, so then what we require is only license
for  any  food  business  and  also  this  FSSAI  is  working  to  standardized  more  foods  in
harmonization with Codex Alimentarius. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:50) 
The traditional foods in India, so they also do not require product approval because they are
already being consumed for centuries in India. And the ingredients and the preparation methods
are well known for those traditional foods and this guarantees their safety but if however the
traditional foods use any new ingredients other than the traditional methodology or traditional
ingredients or food additives or new technologies in preparation they need a product approval. 
Sometimes what happens? So, based on the current rent they may require some food additives,
for example, certain traditional foods the self-life of them is only one or two days, if so if we
want to increase bit further for a week. So, we may require some food additives to be added in
the traditional food. So, any such case, any modification in the process or any modifications in
the ingredients of the traditional foods so they require a product approval.
The  foods  imported  into India  imported  into  India  have to follow  the FSS  Act,  rules  and
regulations. And if the food articles are standardized, the importer only needs a FSSAI license to
import them. The importer also needs to comply with FSSAI regulations for sale and distribution
of the foods. So, it is not only for the food processing or food sale or distribution in India. So, if the importer, importer of the foods also need a FSSAI license and as well as the approval
for any sale distribution of their food products in India. So, if the food articles whatever the
imported food articles are already standardized under FSSAI so they require only license but if
not they also require the product approval, before getting license. So, that means the importer
also comply with the FSSAI standards acts and rules regulations so for any sale, distribution of
their food products in India.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:05) 
If a new or unknown food article is introduced for import, so if any new of unknown food article,
so that means non-standardized one. It is considered non-standardized and requires the product
approval under Section 22 of the FSS Act, 2006. So, the FSS Act, 2006 does not apply to foods
being exported out of India because why? So, they do not require the product approval because it
is not sold to Indian customers.
So, the exporters do not require FSSAI product approval as these food products are not sold to
Indian  consumers,  so  the  exporters.  Non-standardized  food  products  awaiting  for  product
approval or assessed for safety in four categories. So, when we apply for product approval how
the process goes, because if it is a non-standardized food. So, we supposed to get approval from
the FSSAI so what is the procedure? 
So, the expedite product approval, a 90 days outer limit is now in place for completion of the
application review process. So, it is like every other process in India so it has got 90 day windowlimit. So, in this 90 days window limit it goes for various level of reviewing processes and if the
product is referred to the scientific panel for further scrutiny then it maybe more, more than 90
days.
If there are any certain standards to be checked by the scientific panel so then it may require
more than 90 days, the time limit could be extended more than 90 days if the product has to be
sent to scientific panel. On approval they can immediately apply for license. So, till now what we
have seen? So, in the current regulations or scenario in India what we are saying? So, as far as
India is concerned the Food Safety Standards Authority of India is the apex body and the first
FSS Act came into existence on Food Safety and Standards Act as a Food Safety and Standard
Act in 2006 and it is an Act of Parliament and popularly known as Food Act.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:33)
So, till then almost in till 2015 almost 380 articles are categorized in almost 16 categories. So,
based on that there are two major categories of the food product, one is standardized food
products,  non-standardized  food  product.  Standardized  food  products  only  require  product
license to manufacture, sale, distribute or import and non-standardized food items first has to get
the product approval.
So, that takes almost 90 days window but for any case it has to be submitted before the scientific
panel then it may require more than 90 days. So, after once they get the product approval and
they may go for immediately license and based on the standardized, non-standardized food itemthe importer exporter also has to comply to the standards of FSSAI body because the importer
needs the same process, first a product approval and then license for their sale and distribution. 
So,  if  their  products  are  already  standardized  they  can  go  for  license.  If  there  are  non-
standardized food, they have to get approval and then go for license but exporters, so they do not
require  the  FSSAI  product  approval  because  these  food  products  are  not  sold  to  Indian
customers.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:50) 
So, then the new draft regulations. So, as I said, the amendment was recently implemented in
2017 and it got into the practice from January 2018. So, in that the special interest is the Section
22 of the FSS Act which deals with “Nutraceuticals, Functional foods, Novel foods and Health
supplements.’’ For the first time regulations have been proposed for these categories of foods.
So, when we were talking about Nutraceuticals also so I specially told you about this FSS Act. If
these products propound Nutritional or Medicinal benefits they need to have a sound scientific
evidence. So, to get the product approval we supposed to submit the scientific evidence and these
products must not contain either Steroids and Psychotropic drugs so this is also important.
Anyway we are going to see the FDA regulations on these Nutraceuticals and what are all the
Nutraceuticals already into the regulations based on the scientific evidence we are going to see.
The ingredients like vitamins and minerals must confirm to the recommended dietary allowanceso this is what we call it as a RDA for Indians as proposed by the Indian Council of Medial
Research.
So, in such Nutraceuticals, the vitamins and minerals must confirm to the recommended dietary
allowances for Indians as proposed by Indian Council of Medial Research, ICMR.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:23) 
And according to Food Safety and Standards so which is nothing but Licensing and Registration
of food Businesses Regulation, 2011, it is mandatory for all businesses operators, manufacturers,
importers, distributers, wholesalers, retailers, hotels, restaurants, eateries, as well as the petty
food businesses to have an FSSAI regulation license so that they are in compliance with the FSS
Act.
So, in India the food businesses operators, manufacturers, importers, distributers, wholesalers,
retailers, hotels, restaurants, eateries, as well as the petty food businesses to have an FSSAI
regulation and license so that they are in compliance with the FSS Act. So, there may be a
confusion, I mean what is a food business? So, what is the limit? So, for then the food businesses
with an annual turnover up to Indian rupees of 12,00,000 need a registration certificate from the
FSSAI also if the turnover is above than this amount then they need a license as well.
So, if it is up to 12,00,000 then they may require the registration certificate under FSSAI and if
the turnover is more than that they need a license to do their business. The license is of twocategory, one is central license, another one is state license. So, this is well known, central means
an issued by the central government and state means issued by the state government. The central
licenses issued on the basis of manufacturing capacity as well as the turnover as we seen here.
Those operating food businesses within Indian state need a state license that is also based on
capacity and turnover. So, one particular state if you are running that particular business we need
a state license as well. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:29) 
And those operate businesses in two or more states require an additional central license for head
office, head office there is a central license and registered office and separate license registration
for other locations they operate in. So, if the businesses running between state or two or more
states so they require a additional license from central government for their head office or
registered office and also they need separate registration and license to the locations wherever
they are doing the state businesses.
Only transporters need a singular license or registration for all vehicles and individual transporter
runs. So, if the food businesses require the vehicle so then they may require particular license
and registration for those vehicles as well. So, those food business operators that deal with non-
standardized food. So, which requires the further product approval and license have to first apply
for the product approval only then they can obtain a license under the licensing and registrationregulations. All importers and exporters have to obtain a central license from FSSAI so that is
important.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:50) 
So, Food Safety and Standards Amendment Regulation, 2017 so this is what I have been talking
about. So, it was the first FSSAI came into existence in 2006, FSS Act and in 2015 they started
adding  the  standardized  food  varieties  and  categories  them  into  standardized  and  non-
standardized and they kept on adding these non-standardized food items once they got their
approval and their license so then slowly they start adding into their standardized food items as
well.
So, now the recent amendment in the regulation was happened in 2017. So, the Food Safety and
Standards,  so  that  means  the  Food  Product  Standards  and  Food  Additives  Amendment
Regulation, 2017. So, it was again done under the regulatory body of Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India FSSAI. So, this operates under Official gazette of India with reference to
microbiological requirements for fish and fishery products so this got major concerned in 2017
amendment regulation.
So, the regulation considers the following criteria. The one is, revised microbiological necessities
for sea foods and new varieties of fish and fishery products and maximum allowable limits of
hygiene indicator organism and safety indicator organism in a wide range of fish and fishery
products other food items namely oils, fats, oats and pasta and sampling plan and reference test
method for microbiological limits.
So, these regulations even in the when we were discussing few slides earlier also we have
discussed about this. So, the once the Act is made and then and there, there may be a revisionand there may be a amendment regulations and also while we are discussing about the past 3
session we also told. So, almost centuries  back there was some other organism was target
organism  for  past  3  session  but  after  sometimes  the  target  organism  have  been  changed,
organisms have been changed for many processes and same thing.
So, the past 10 lectures we were discussing about the recent developments in the food processing
technology. So, for example the sensors, biosensors is a new area which is developing. So, these
kind of test methods also then and there included in the Food Safety and Standards. So, that is
why this particular act requires amendment then and there but how it is being done? We are
going to see in couple of slides after.
These standards have been finalized and come into force on 1st January 2018 from then on this is
being followed. The revised microbiological standards aim at guaranteeing quality and food
safety of sea food produce in the domestic market. So, that is what I told that is done majorly for
these sea products.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:01) 
And so how it was done? So, when they thought about the amendments so what are the steps or
at  least  in  2017  amendment  regulations  so  what  are  all  being  followed?  The  through  a
notification dated October 2016 the FSSAI made changes to the Food Safety and Standards
Regulations, 2011. So, the previous one is 2011 with reference to ‘Proprietary Foods’, the
existing regulation of 2.12.1 has been altered and substituted with the new one.The FSSAI considered objections and suggestion that it had invited from the public on 27 April
2016.  So,  the  notification  was  done  around  October  2016  and  before  that  objections  and
suggestions invited from the public also taken into account in their draft regulation and made this
alteration and these regulations were considered as a Food Safety and Standards so otherwise
food product standards and food additives Ninth Amendment Regulations in 2016.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:21) 
So, then FSSAI come up with the definition of proprietary food by offering the details as what is
not to be integrated as a proprietary food. The proprietary foods will therefore include foods that
have not been standardized but will not include. So, it is not like all non-standardized items will
come into that this category for product approval. So, the FSSAI come up with the definition for
the proprietary food.
So,  based  on  that  the  proprietary  foods  will  therefore  includes  foods  that  have  not  been
standardized. So, that means non-standardized foods but will not include the new foods for
special dietary usages, foods for special medical purposes, practical foods, nutraceuticals and
health supplements. Any deviation in the quality parameters of standardized food, as specified in
the Food Safety Standards Regulations under FSSAI does not imply that the resulting product is
the proprietary food. So, there may be a chance. So, if the quality parameters of standardized food is not met so can I
put it in a proprietary food? No, that should not imply that the resulting product is a proprietary
food.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:44) 
Other than additives, other than ingredients  utilized in the proprietary foods must either be
standardized or permitted for usage in the preparation of other standardized food under these
regulations. So, any additives or ingredients utilized in the proprietary food, must either be
standardized or permitted for usage in the preparation of other standardized food under these
regulations.
However, FSSAI may specify from time to time exclusion of define ingredients. So, that is why
everywhere I am mentioning the time, date and month even year everything because then and
there, there may be a changes and revisions based on the scientific evidences. So, based on that
the FSSAI may specify time to time the exclusion of definite ingredients also. So, once it was
standardized, so there may be a chance to remove them from the standardized condition based on
the revisions and reports.
And proprietary foods may also have vitamins, minerals in quantities not in excess of one RDA
of the relevant micronutrients so RDA is recommended dietary allowances. Only those additives
and at the levels that have been mentioned in Appendix A so that we are going to see this is theAppendix. Mentioned in Appendix A of these regulations may perhaps be used in the proprietary
foods and according to the grouping and subcategory of foods they are mentioned in.
So,  FSSAI  has  also  made  it  compulsory  to  mention  on  the  labels  the  food  category  or
subcategory  together  with  the  generic  name,  nature  and  composition  of  proprietary  a food
namely oils, fats, oats and pasta. So, this proprietary food means like the ownership. So, only
particular company will be manufacturing that particular food. So, that is the way the proprietary
foods are categorized.
So, these proprietary foods also has got many additive which is already there in the standardized
food item itself, but here what it is told? The FSSAI may specify from time to time the exclusion
of  that  particular  definite  ingredients  and  also  if  they  have  any  vitamins  and  minerals  in
quantities we should not be in excess amount already specified by the FSSAI for the relevant
micronutrient level.
So, which is nothing but a recommended dosage allowance or recommended dietary allowance
and also the proprietary food items should have the proper labeling. So, in that label the food
category  and  subcategory  together  with  the  generic  name,  nature  and  composition  of  the
proprietary food also to be mentioned.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:44) 
So, this is one particular example I have taken from the regulations 2017. There are many tables
under this Appendix A. So, this we are going to see and I will also show the other examples for
other tables. The table 1 shows about the list of food additives for using bread and biscuits and so
this is the category of the food like acidity regulators, the category of the food additives. 
So, if it is a sodium fumarate it is general manufacturing GMP for the bread and if you are seeing
the Acetic acid or Lactic acid so they have mentioned even 2500 ppm max. So, for biscuits it is
under GMP regulations only. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:33) 
So, like this there are many tables under the same appendix. So, the list of food additives for use
in bread and biscuits that we have seen and use in edible oils and fats and use in fish and fish
products and to use in thermally processed fruits, thermally processed vegetables and use in
sugars and salt almost 20 tables are there in appendix. So, you can them in the if you browse the
Food Safety and Standards Amendment Regulation 2017 Appendix A. So, you will get to know
about various categories and subcategory level of foods and their recommended allowances.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:10) 
The next one we already talked about the Codex Alimentarius, so we are going to see about this.
The food was mainly produced, sold, consumed locally, but till the last century the amount of
food traded internationally has grown exponentially. So, in ancient days so it is a local food
market, they are produced, sold and consumed locally but last century the amount of food traded
internationally has grown exponentially and a quantity and variety of food never before possible
travels the globe today.
So, in such case it is not only the FSSAI Act. So, whatever we use in India so it also has to be of
international standards otherwise we will not be able to export the foods which are prepared in
India. So, in that line so we also supposed to review the international food laws and FDA
regulations Food and Drug Administration regulations so for that only we are going to discuss
about this.So, in that case the Codex Alimentarius international food standards, guidelines and codes of
practice contribute to the safety, quality and fairness of this international food trade. Consumers
can trust the safety and quality of the food products they buy and importers can trust the food
they ordered will  be in accordance  with their specifications.  So, if it is coming  under the
whatever the food items the consumers, consumed or the importers can import.
So, if that is under the standards of Codex Alimentarius so they can purely trust those food items.
The codex standards are based on sound science provided by independent international risk
assessment bodies or ad-hoc consultations organized by FAO Food Agricultural Organization
and WHO World Health Organization. So, the both consumers as well as importers can blindly
trust the Codex standards because they are based on sound science provided by independent
international risk assessment bodies or ad-hoc consultations organized by Food Agricultural
Organization as well as World Health Organization.
And also the World Trade Organization members if they wish to apply any stricter food safety
measures then those set by Codex may be required to justify these measures scientifically. So,
that means the trust level is that much. So, even if some of the WTO members that means the
World Trade Organization members wish to apply any stricter food safety measures then those
set by the codex they may required to justify those measures scientifically. So, that means the
Codex Alimentarius Standards are internationally accepted standards.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:11) 
So, then next one is the FSSAI compliance criterion for import of food products in India. So, the
food articles imported to India from foreign counties and distributed in India need to confirm to
the FSSAI regulations or suffer restrictions on import. So, the whatever imported to India from
foreign counties and distributed in India need to confirm to the FSSAI regulations or suffer
restrictions on import.
The FSSAI has also made the stringent regulations for packaging and labeling under Food Safety
and Standards so which comes under packaging and labeling category, so in 2011. So, FSSAI
implemented stringent regulations for packaging and labeling also because when it is imported
from the foreign counties you should be in the English language, because the foreign country
language we may not know and in that case we may not be able to read what is written in the
packaging as well.
So, the FSSAI Food Safety and Standards Regulation in 2011 also applied stringent regulations
on packaging and labeling as well. So, example is all chocolates as define in the Food Safety and
Standards are Food Products Standards and Food Additives Regulation, 2011 are to be prepared
from milk only. So, they cannot contain any vegetable oils or fats, labels need to mention
artificial flavors used to comply with the FSSAI regulations.
So, this is where many foreign chocolate companies were trapped because as per the FSSAI
regulation  the Food Safety and Standards  Regulations, 2011 only the milk to be used and
vegetable oil or fats should not be used in the chocolates and also their labels need to mention
any artificial flavors they are used for that particular preparation of chocolates so that also should
comply with the FSSAI regulations. 
If these guidelines are not adhered then the chocolates are not permitted. The global chocolate
manufacturing giants are suffering a huge loss as a consequence of this particular Food Safety
and Standards Regulation in 2011.(Refer Slide Time: 34:38) 
 So, I just put a example here. So, it is taken from Financial Express Newspaper on April 18th
2005, the Cadbury seeks center not to use vegetable fat in chocolates. So, it is said that the
Cadbury India Managing Director Bharat Puri told Financial Express, world over 5 percentage
vegetable fat is allowed to be used in chocolate, in India however this is not so. So, we have got
stringent regulations in that.
So, that is why they were mentioning about the how much dollars they are losing per ton. So,
here only the key ingredients what is allowed in India is milk, sugar and cocoa and sometimes a
chocolate to qualify one has to have cocoa as an ingredient. So, we cannot use the vegetable fats
or vegetable oils in that. So, this is just to tell you about that.(Refer Slide Time: 35:35) 
So, then the same FSSAI compliance criteria for import of food products in India. So, FSSAI
stipulates that all ingredients including additives need to be mentioned on labels in descending
order of their composition by weight and volume. So, the additives needs to be mentioned on the
labels of the food in descending order by their composition as well as by weight and volume
which for alcoholic beverages is not always possible.
So, if that is the case so the import of any alcoholic beverages must suffer with this stringent
regulation. The liquor imports have therefore fallen, since labels that fail to mention additives
like color, water, flavoring, preservatives are all withheld at ports itself. So, these import liquor
have therefore fallen because they cannot mention the composition, composition like color,
water, flavoring, preservatives etcetera and their label so they cannot be sold in India.
Another stipulation for food products is to have inseparable labels not as a stickers. So, the label
should be inseparable it is not like a stickers. Food products with detachable labels are also
withheld when it comes to ports. To ensure consumer safety as some of these stickers are only in
Chinese and Japanese so consumers cannot understand what is written. So, these reasons have
compelled many foreign companies to withdraw from India.
So, another FSSAI strict regulation is that the label should be printed in English language and
Chinese, Japanese most of the labeling is will be done in their language either Chinese orJapanese so that also problem with this FSSAI. So, because of that those imported companies
were compelled to withdraw from India. 
So, the compliance criteria wise one is in chocolates there should not be any vegetable fat and
oils that we have seen and also the labeling it should not be a stickers it should be a inseparable
labels and the label should have got the additives and ingredients in descending order of their
composition which one is low in the end, which one is higher the top by their composition
weight and volume.
And for alcoholic beverages since this particular categorization of their ingredients and additives
based on their weight and volume is not possible so they are fail to meet the standards of FSSAI
in India and another thing is the label should be of English language because of that certain
companies also withdrawn their import from India.
(Refer Slide Time: 38:28) 
There are certain compliance criteria so we are going to discuss certain things and I request you
as always, I request you to read further for any further compliance criteria for labeling of
imported food in India. The language on labels must be in English as per FSSAI Regulations,
2011.  The  “Vegetarian”,  “Non-Vegetarian”  must  be  declared  by  a  fixing  the  symbol  for
“Vegetarian” and “Non-Vegetarian” on packages, thus you might have seen certain that red
symbol is for non-veg and green symbol is for vegetarian.Mention name and complete address of the importer in India and mention net weight or number
of measures of volumes of contents and mention batch number or lot number or code number
and FSSAI license number as well.
(Refer Slide Time: 39:18)
And month, year and which the commodity is manufactured or prepared and declare “Best
Before” date of the packaging. Mention nutritional information, nutritional facts per 100 grams
or 100 milliliter per serving of food product on the label this also we have seen in Aseptic
Processing lecture the a products, the sterilized milk product how it was defined in the labeling. 
So, it is defined in the descending order and also it was done for 100 grams probably 100 ml.
And name and address of the manufacturer should be mentioned on the label and FSSAI logo
and license number of the importer should be available on the label. So, these are all certain
compliance criteria for labeling of imported food product so there are lot many so I request you
to further refer the references which is given at this end of this lecture.(Refer Slide Time: 40:19) 
The Indian food safety regulations are primarily based on the Codex Alimentarius to meet the
international standards. The Codex was formed with the collaborative efforts of WHO as well as
FAO to eminent United Nations health and food bodies. The Codex Alimentarius international
food standards, guidelines and codes of practice contribute to the safety and quality of the food
that reaches the consumers and FSSAI regulations adhere to international standards as well to
make certain export businesses.
And other international standards formulated by global agencies like the European Food Safety
Authority,  Food  Standards  Australia,  New  Zealand  and  the  USFDA  Food  and  Drug
Administration from US have also to some extent being assimilated, integrated and harmonized
into Indian Standards thereby bringing them almost at par with the global standards. So, even
though we are discussing now about the FSSAI, so this is also the standards are also derived
based on the global standards.
So, that we will not face any problem in terms of standards and safety and it is said that the
global agencies like European Food Safety Authority, Food Standards Australia, New Zealand
and USFDA Food Drug Administration have also contributed some extent in the assimilation,
integration and harmonization of Indian Standards thereby bringing them almost at par with the
global standards.So, actually in that line so we also will review quickly about the FDA regulations and also some
of the European regulations so which has also got great impact on the Indian Standards. 
(Refer Slide Time: 42:22) 
So, there should not be any confusion that why the international laws or US Regulations and
European Regulations are discussed here in the Indian contacts but most of the Indian standards
were also derived from them to make this as a global standards it is not only for India. So, the
agencies responsible for food as Environmental Protection Agency in terms of drinking water
and pesticides.
And Food and Drug Administration FDA, food not meat, drug, dietary supplements, cosmetics,
medical devices, bottled water, seafood, wild game so that means exotic meat and eggs in shell,
wine beverages with less than 7 percentage alcohol everything will come under the agency of
Food and Drug Administration.  Then Federal Trade Commission, which is  for advertising.
Alcohol  and Tobacco  Tax  and Trade  Bureau TTB  which is  for alcohol  and  United  States
Department of Agriculture USDA, 
So, this takes care of the raw vegetables and fruits, meats, poultry, processing and grading of
eggs. So, whatever left here, in food the meat is not come under the category of Food and Drug
Administration. So, further the United States Department of Agriculture so which grades the raw
vegetables, fruits, meats, poultry, processing and grading of eggs. (Refer Slide Time: 43:47) 
So, what is USDA regulations? The FSSAI so this is nothing but Food Safety and Inspection
Services, FSIS is Food Safety Inspection Service division of USDA is responsible for meat and
poultry  inspection.  If  a processing  plant  cells  products  in-state  only  the  inspection  can  be
performed by a state inspectors. Facilities can opt for federal or state inspection, federal means
centrally. 
A state’s program must enforce requirements at least equal to those imposed by the Federal Meat
and Poultry Products Inspection Acts. So, the state cannot have its own regulations so they also
should  enforce  the  requirements  at  least  equal  to  those  imposed  by  Federal  Meat  Poultry
Products Inspection Acts. If inspected by a state the product sale is limited to that particular state
whatever we followed in India. 
So, if the business is done by inter states through two or more states then we also told as per the
FSSAI we supposed to take each states  permission the same with USDA as well. So, the
regulations says that so the X CFR federal regulations so X means title and this Y means section
and Z is nothing but a part and a is nothing but a sub-part. So, this is the way the regulations
were given.(Refer Slide Time: 45:14) 
And FSIS Canning Regulations. So, here we are going to see only the important things. So, to
achieve commercial sterility using scheduled process determined by processing authority so this
we have discussed in earlier Thermal Processing lectures itself. So, for example 9CFR318.300
which is for canned meat products and 9CFR381.300 which is for canned poultry products these
are FSIS Canning Regulations.
Then 7CFR 52 these are standards for grades for certain fruits and vegetables. So, they are
Administered by Agricultural Marketing Service of USDA so this is called AMS. So, this I have
just a put as a example for FSIS Canning Regulations.(Refer Slide Time: 46:09) 
Then various FDA Regulations, Food Drug and Administration Regulations so this we have
already seen here. So, what are all the foods covered under the category of FDA? So, here we
have seen about the USDA Regulations. Here we have seen about FSIS Canning Regulations.
So, here now FDA Regulations. So, the 21 CFR 1 to 99 talks about general regulations for the
enforcement of FD and C Act, FPLA and Color Additives.
And 21 CFR 100 to 169 so they cover food standards, General Manufacturing Practices, low-
acid foods, acidified foods and food labeling and 21 CFR 170 to 199 so they cover Food
Additives and 21 CFR 1 naught 1 covers about food labeling principal display panel so this Idiscussed for FSSAI Standards in India. So, this is the 21 CFR 1 naught 1 under FDA so this
talks about also the food labeling which is mainly on principal display panel. 
And 21CFR 1 naught 8 so that covers the Emergency Permit Control: acidified foods 21CFR 1
naught 8.25; low acid food 21CFR 1 naught 8.35. And 21 CFR 110 current GMPs the current
GMPs is nothing but CGMP so this we discussed in Sanitation lecture itself. And 21 CFR 113 is
for low acid food, 114 is for acidified foods. So, these two comes under here, food standards
GMPs, low acid food, acidified food and labeling.
So, 110 is for current GMPs, 113 is for low acid food, 114 is for acidified foods. So, these are
FDA Regulations. So, these you can browse if you put 21 CFR 113 so all the regulations which
are being followed for low acid food will come. So, you can access the website ww dot fda dot
government so in that you will get all these information.
(Refer Slide Time: 48:28) 
And 21 CFR 155 are standards for canned vegetables, 182 for GRAS list Generally Recorded as
Safe List and 21 CFR 170.20 so they are for principles for evaluating safety of food additive and
21 CFR 171 they are instructions for preparing a food additive petition and 21 CFR 73, 74, 81
are for color additives, 21 CFR 58 good laboratory practices. So, pre market testing and 21 CFR
155.190-4 so this is for tomato product identity and 21 CFR 1 naught 2.30, 1 naught 2.32, 1
naught 2.33, 129; 59 FR 61529 everything is for juices and water.So, different regulations they may be put in different categorizes. For example, if you go for 21
CFR 171 so it mainly talks about the instructions for preparing food additive petition but for
juices and water there may be certain regulations told in different places of the FDA Regulations.
(Refer Slide Time: 49:42) 
And this is another thing so when I was talking about the Nutraceuticals I told whatever the
climb we are making here supposed to comply with the scientific evidences. So, based on the
scientific evidences FDA authorized certain health claims of the products. So, those were listed
here so it may be helpful for you to understand the Nutraceutical benefits here because it is
approved by Food and Drug Administration.
The general regulations are given in 21 CFR 1 naught 1.14. The calcium and Osteoporosis effect,
so this is the disease. So, calcium effect on Osteoporosis is given under 21 CFR 1 naught 1.72
and fat which is related to Cancer so those regulations were given in 21 CFR 1 naught 1.73 and
sodium level on Hypertension which is given in 21 CFR 1 naught 1.74 and saturated fats,
cholesterol and on Coronary Heart diseases which is given in 21 CFR 1 naught 1.75.
Then fiber containing grains, fruits, vegetables on Cancer is given in 21 CFR 1 naught 1.76 and
fiber containing grains, fruits and vegetables on CHD Coronary Heart Diseases which is given in
21 CFR 1 naught 1.77 and fruits and vegetables and on Cancer is given in 21 CFR 1 naught 1.78
and folic acid and neural tube defects which is given in 21 CFR 1 naught 1.79. Sugar, alcohols
on dental caries so which is given in 21 CFR 1 naught 1.80.Soluble fiber from whole oats etcetera on CHD is given in 21 CFR 1 naught 1.81; soy protein on
CHD is 21 CFR 1 naught 1.82; plant sterols, plant stenols on CHD is given in 21 CFR 1 naught
1.83. So, this is FDA authorized health claims based on the scientific evidence. So, these federal
regulations  comfortably  discusses  about  the  diseases  and  food  components  or  dietary
supplements against that particular diseases with based on scientific evidence provided to FDA.
So, we can totally trust these composition on that particular diseases.
(Refer Slide Time: 52:23) 
The next one is the GMA which is nothing but Grocery Manufactures Association in US and
NFPA which is nothing but National Food Processors Association. So, they came up with certain
bulletins  as  a  regulations.  26L  talks  about  thermal  processes  for  low  acid  foods  in  metal
containers; 27L talks about the tomato products and 30L talks about the processes for low acid
canned foods in glass containers and 32L talks about an information bulletin on retort operation,
32L talks about the information bulletin on retort operation.
And 41L discusses about flexible packaging integrity bulletin and 43L gives the guidelines about
the  validation  guidelines  for  automated  control  of  food  processing  systems  used  for  the
processing  and  packaging  of  preserved  foods  and  44L  talks  about  the  continuous  rotary
sterilizers, design and operation. 43L talks about the validation guidelines for automated control
of food processing systems used for the processing and packaging of preserved foods.So, again here those bulletins are given as an example. So, there are lot many so you may refer
based on your requirements or some of your working in particular industry. So, based on your
needs you can browse in the Food Safety Standards or FDA to get to know more about all the
bulletins or whatever the required bulletins for your industry.
(Refer Slide Time: 54:10) 
And there are EU and UK Regulations as well. The European Union Food Laws can be accessed
in this particular website which is ww efsa europa dot eu and UK Food Laws can be accessed in
www dot food dot government dot uk. So the food standards agencies FSA for UK food laws, for
European food laws they have got European Food Safety Authority EFSA. So, because we have already discussed enough about so again it will be a the regulation numbers
and what it discusses about. So, I would like to give you as a home assignment to check for its
various regulations implied by European Union as well as United Kingdom. 
(Refer Slide Time: 55:10) 
So, in this particular class we first discussed about the FSSAI Regulations so which is nothing
but the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. So, what should be the procedure to get
the standards and safety check for the standardized food and non-standardized food and also
what are all the regulations followed for imported and exported food. 
And also we said that for imported food, so the FSSAI got stringent regulations and because of
that certain companies also suffer quite a lot because of these stringent regulations but these are
for Food Safety and Standards only. And also for exporters so they may be under the regulation
acts but they do not require any food safety license because they do not sale or distribute their
products in India and also we told about whatever the safety standards are drawn by FSSAI so
that comes under this Codex Alimentarius Regulations, the Codex standards. So, to comply that
Codex standards so it also has to be derived or it has also to be par with international Food
Safety and Standard Laws. (Refer Slide Time: 46:09) 
So, in that line so we have discussed about the FDA Regulations. So, from US so whatever I
have discussed other than India is mostly USDA regulation and FSIS Canning Regulations and
FDA Regulations and also as we discussed in Nutraceuticals. So, we have also checked about the
authorized health claims which is proposed by FDA on the Nutraceuticals. (Refer Slide Time: 56:51)
And also certain bulletins which are given by GMA which is nothing but Grocery Manufactures
of Association in US and National Food Processors Association US so that also we have seen
about. And I have given you to check the European and UK Regulations so that because as we
saw earlier the FSSAI also includes the International Food Safety and Standards and their laws to
be par with international Food Safety and Standards. So, in that case we also have to know about
the US standards, European Standards as well as the UK regulations to get to know more about
them.(Refer Slide Time: 57:38) 
So, with this I will end this lecture and also these two books I have used for this particular lecture
and for Indian food regulations, so that for that I have accessed this particular website which is
last accessed on July to take some points. So, other than that for almost all these laws we have
just put as a examples, as an example we discussed and to get to know more about that.
So, please refer their website as I told in the last class also, all these sanitation regulatory bodies
also can be accessed on their particular website because now we have got lot of information in
the webs and also the books what are all the disadvantages because as I said it needs revision and
amendments within 2 years. So, in that case it would not be a wise idea to refer any books for the
recent amendments so in that case so we will be able to get to know recent amendments in their
website only.
So, in that case only I am urging you to refer their website or requesting you to refer their
website for the recent amendments and the recent regulations which is improvised or which is
modified to gain more knowledge on that, thank you.