Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Lecture No. 4
Milk-Pasteurization
Good afternoon all, today we are going to see about milk pasteurization.
(Refer Slide Time: 0:40)
So the outline goes like this, the regulations and definitions of milk pasteurization and milk
processing that is nothing but a pasteurization and effects of pasteurization and packaging and
shelf life. (Refer Slide Time: 0:54)
So the introduction about milk pasteurization is why we do milk pasteurization is, the first thing
is to ensure the safety by killing pathogenic microorganisms and also to prolong the shelf life to
destroy undesirable enzymes and to reduce the number of viable spoilage microorganisms. So
these three  are ends of milk pasteurization.  And also our target  is to achieve  99 point  99
percentage, that is nothing but a 5 log reduction in viable organisms. 
So here the most heat resistant microorganism is Coxiella Burnetii. So we are going to do milk
pasteurization for killing of this most heat resistant microorganism, which is present in the milk.
Actually this pasteurization is nothing but a mild heat treatment this causes only minor changes
in the milk flavor and nutritional quality. And also there are variety of milks, the milk means the
whole  milk,  reduced  fat  milk,  non-fat  or  skimmed  milk  which  is  free  of  cream  and  milk
beverages fortified, nowadays there are supplements, vitamins, minerals and other nutraceutical
components which are added into the milk to get a fortified milk. 
So that is they also called as milk. And organic milk, flavored milk, low lactose milk., so all
comes under milk category only. So actually if we see the history of milk pasteurization, so we
all are know the word was coined after the name of Louis Pasteur. So who applied the heat
treatment to increase the shelf life of the wine. So then he extended the same procedure to the
milk to increase the shelf life. So initially when the pasteurization was done for the milk, so itwas the heat resistant organism, which is nothing but mycobacterium tuberculosis so which
causes tuberculosis. So in around 19th century, so that was around 19th century. 
So that time this was the micro bacterium tuberculosis. So this was the most heat resistant
bacterium at the time, so which causes the tuberculosis. To kill this pathogenic organism first
first pasteurization was applied. So then after that they realized so this is the most heat resistant
microorganism, which is nothing but a Coxiella Burnetii. So which causes a Q fever..
First country who made it mandatory for milk pasteurization was Chicago in U.S. and also after
that the FDA which is nothing but a Food and Drug Administration, so they made it mandatory
for sale of interstate. If we want to sell milk between the states then it is mandatory that milk
should be pasteurized first, this was done in around 1987. So this is the past history then after
that there were many regulations and rules there were ordinance they were followed to further
milk pasteurization. So we are going to see one by one. 
(Refer Slide Time: 4:41)
So the code of federal regulations that is CFR, so they defines the milk, what is called milk. So
the lacteal secrecation practically free from colostrum, colostrum is nothing but a first milk of
any mammals after the new born obtained by the complete milking of one or more healthy cows.
Milk that is in the final package form for beverage use shall have been pasteurized. So that is
button criteria or ultra-pasteurized. So we will be seeing the conditions, so in subsequent slides, shall contain not less than 8 point 25
percentage of milk solids and non-fat and not less than 3 point 25 percentage of milk fat. Milk
may have been adjusted by separating part of the milk fat therefrom or by adding that to cream.
So you can remove or add, maybe some consumer wanted in that way, then the cream is added to
the normal milk, or they may be separated from the milk as well and concentrated milk, dry
whole milk, skim milk, concentrated  skim  milk,  non-fat dry milk. So all  comes  under the
definition of milk. And milk also may be homogenized. So this is the definition code of federal
regulations gives for milk. 
(Refer Slide Time: 6:04)
Then the production of fluid milk in U.S. is regulated by FDA that is nothing but Food and Drug
Administration and also PMO that is there are guidelines which are outlined by FDA which is
nothing but a pasteurized milk ordinance and which specifies the pasteurization conditions and
milk quality, antibiotic testing and current good manufacturing practices. So for all categories, so
they lay down some ordinance. So which is called PMO, pasteurized milk ordinance, which was
proposed by FDA. So those were guidelines.
So according to that guidelines what is pasteurization the which is lay down by PMO, which is
nothing but a pasteurized milk ordinance. So the process of heating every particle of milk. This is
very much important. So the moment I say okay, it should be 63 degree for 30 minute. So eachand every particle of the milk should be heated to that particular temperature and hold on to the
particular time of 30 minutes or milk product is properly designed and operated equipment. For
example, pasteurization. So what we do at home, we heat the milk, is that part pasteurization?
So  that  is  what  so  it  should  be  properly  designed  and  operated  equipment  to  one  of  the
temperatures given in the following table this we are going to see so what are all the time
temperature regulations for pasteurization and holding continuously at or above that temperature
for at least the corresponding specified time. So the particular temperature and particular minute,
it should be heated to particular temperature and hold on for a specified time at that particular
temperature.  So  this  following  table  we  are  going  to  see.  So  this  is  the  definition  of
pasteurization according to pasteurized milk ordinance.
(Refer Slide Time: 8:00)
And there is a International Dairy Federation as well. This is IDF, International Dairy Federation.
So how they define  pasteurization  is  a process  applied  to your product with the object  of
minimizing possible health hazards arising from pathogenic microorganisms associated with
milk by heat treatment, which is consistent with the minimal chemical physical and organoleptic
changes in the product. So it is not only important to kill the pathogenic organisms, which is
present in the milk. And also it should not give any damage to the chemical or physical or
organoleptic changes in the product. That is also important.So one such example is the alkaline phosphatase enzyme which is present in the raw milk is
slightly more his heat resistant than the Coxiella burnetii, which is the heat resistant non spore-
forming pathogen. So which is present in the raw milk. So the heat treatment is applied to kill
these pathogenic organisms and also we need to take care of this alkaline phosphate. Sometimes
the test is to conduct the phosphatase enzyme activity, whether if the activity is present, so that
means  the  pasteurization  is  not  enough.  So  we  also  have  to  reduce  or  inactivate  alkaline
phosphatase enzyme activity, but this regulation is given by U.S.
So your pasteurization should be good enough to inactivate this alkaline phosphatase enzyme
activity as well. But in European regulation says not only reduce the phosphatase activity and
also  we  need  to  take  care  of lactoperoxidase  activity  because  it  should not  inactivate  this
lactoperoxidase activity which is present in the milk. So they give minimum, maximum ranges of
pasteurization  temperature.  So  what  they  say  is  pasteurized  milk  must  exhibit  both  the
phosphatase negative test as I said, so this is also harmful.
So we need to inactivate along with pathogenic organism and lactoperoxidase positive test
because that is the enzyme which is present in the milk., okay. So they give you minimum and
maximum activity minimum and maximum. So it should show negative test for phosphatase
activity and positive results for lactoperoxidase activity accordingly, the temperature is chosen.
So in the subsequent chapters, we will also see how to choose a particular time temperature
combination which kills the organisms as well as which does not give any denaturation of
enzymes, that we will see in the subsequent lectures, okay. (Refer Slide Time: 11:11)
So this is the following table what I was talking about here given by PMO. So if it is a vat
pasteurization, vast pasteurization is nothing but a batch process, okay. So vat pasteurization is
done for 63 degree centigrade for 30 minute. So this process is called low temperature and low
time pasteurization which is nothing but a LTLT. So here how it is being done is, first we need to
heat it at 63 degrees centigrade and hold it for 30 minute and cool it to the ambient temperature
then remove it from the batch by batch.
So this is the energy consuming process because what you do is you heat it to 63 and hold it and
we again to heat it you need to use heating medium and to cool it to again to the temperature and
you need to use cooling medium. And also you are taking long time but process wise it is simple
because what you require is just one jacketed vessel to heat and hold and cool, but though I am
saying one jacketed vessel is enough, but it is always a good practice, Wwe already told it as a
proper equipment proper typical licensed vat pasteurizer you should do it. So then after that the
continuous that that is nothing but high temperature short time pasteurization. So this is nothing
but a continuous process.
So this was introduced to reduce the energy consumption, which is a disadvantage in the batch
process. So here the temperature is 72 degrees centigrade the hold on time is 15 second. So here
one advantage is what happens is the pasteurized milk which comes out of the plate type heat
exchanger here, we use plate type heat exchanger. So the pasteurized milk which comes out ofthe holding tube is used to heat the raw milk, so that the pasteurized milk gets cooled and your
raw milk is getting heated to some medium temperature.
So that way you conserve some of the energy so this is a good practice compared to the batch
sterilization process. So the time consumption also very less compared to the batch process. It is
15 second. And also there are certain HHST process, which is nothing but higher heat so here
high temperature short time, but here higher heat shorter time pasteurization. So this is done at
89 degrees and one second and 90-degree point 5 second and 94-degree if point 1 second and 96
degree  point  05  second  and  hundred  degree  point  01  second.  So  these  are  all  are  HHST
processes.
And if you heat it to 137 point 8 degree for 2 seconds, so that is called ultra-pasteurized milk. So
in U.S. most of the people prefer the ultra-pasteurized milk compared to normal pasteurized milk
because this can stay up to 3 months, 3 months of refrigerate stor storage. So the temperature is a
bit high, but sometimes the flavor you get cooked flavor because of this high temperature. So this
is the time temperature relation given for various process by PMO.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:11)
So  this  is  the  typical  continuous  pasteurization.  Now, but  there  may  be  changes  because
sometimes we already discuss the milk means maybe whole milk, may be organic milk, may be
skimmed milk. So based on the product there may be changes in this diagram. So it is like ageneric diagram, how the sterilization happens. So the major equipment is this is a tank, and this
is nothing but a pump. So this is separator and this is a homogenizer and this is plate type heat
exchanger.
So this is holding tube. So where it is holding to that particular temperature or higher that is all
measures. This is after packaging., this is process controlled and packaging section. So in the
plate type heat exchanger, so this is the regeneration section. So this is cooling section. This is
heating section. So this is hot water. This is cold water. So this is creamy milk, cream part. So
this is skimmed milk part.
So what happens is from the balance tank, the raw milk is pumped and sent to the regenerator
section. So where from here you are pasteurized milk is coming. So this is your pasteurized milk.
So it exchanges heat then after that the raw milk is passed through the separated section via flow
controller. So this is nothing but one flow controller. So these are all safety measures these flow
controllers and valves certain valves are there and certain pumps also there, so those were to
check in between the conditions. So then it goes to the separator where cream and skimmed milk
part is separated. So then this is the density transmitter, this is again flow transmitter, 7 is a flow
transmitter. 
So then 9  is a another regulating valve. So this 10 is nothing but a shut up valve so which if any
problem then then it will stop the input. So then 7 is nothing but again flow transmitter. So 11 is
nothing but a check valve. So it allows only this direction of the flow and if you want cream,
then it will be taken from here or otherwise it will go to the homogenizer, homogenizer in the
sense the large fat chunks will be homogenized, homogenized into small particle size. 
Then if you want then it can be again added back to the skimmed milk, then 7 is nothing but a
flow transmitter, then it is pumped to the heating section of the plate type heat exchanger where
more hot water is used to exchange the heat then it is heated to the particular temperature. For
example, we said it is 72 degrees centigrade at 15 seconds. So in the hold on tube, so it will be
almost it the milk spends 15 seconds so which is now heated at 72 degree centigrade at the
heating section of the plate type heat exchanger. Then after that it goes to this is CFDV flow
diversion valve.So what happens here is it ensures the 70-degree after it comes out of the holding tube it is
heated to 72 degree because it is it is held at 72 degree 15-second. So if the temperature is not
enough or it is not pasteurized to that temperature, then it it sends back, it sends back to the
balance tank again, or if it meets the temperature regulation, then it has to go through the
regenerator section.
Then it goes to cooling section where cold water is used to cool and it comes then after that from
here,  it  goes  to  this  section  so  further  packaging.  So  this  is  a  generalized  overview  of
pasteurization in the continuous process. So there may be changes. I already told here we if we
want to cream milk some consumer wanted the creamy layer above the milk if the consumer
wanted that product or if the company manufactures that product so then there is no need of
separation or if they wanted to go for production of skimmed milk, then it is cream is separated
then only skimmed milk is going. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:58)
So this is the milk processing. In U.S. raw milk., so which is what we are having it in the balance
tank that is stored up to 72 hours almost 3 days at a refrigeration temperature legally below 7
point 2 degree centigrade, but preferably at or below 4 degrees centigrade. So in the balance
tank, you are allowed to keep it for 3 days but if you are maintaining at refrigeration temperature,
so  from  the  silos  raw  milk  is  clarified,  preheated,  separated,  standardized,  homogenized,
pasteurized and cooled. So what we have seen is heating, pasteurized and cool and in between
then some separation we have seen, the creamy layer from the skimmed milk.
So other than that, this also can be done, so based on the industry needs, what for they have
employed the pasteurization unit. And finally the cooled pasteurized milk is pumped into the
storage tank until package. So here also the we should ensure there is no recontamination issue.
So there are certain safety measures also taken while processing the milk by a pasteurization. So
one is the flow diversion valve as I said, already, so it automatically diverts milk back to the
balance tank if the milk is not at the required temperature.
So if it is not at 72-degree, it will send back to the balance tank and use of positive displacement
pump which ensures so we use pumps to ensures that the pressure of the pasteurized milk has
higher than that of the raw milk. So that there will not be any mixing at the regeneration section.
Additional safety measures include an indicator thermometer, I already told while explaining the
process itself and positively sloped holding tube. So for example, if I put holding tube this wayright and there may be a chance of some milk packet stays here. So when we put slope, then it
flows without any resistance.
So that way they ensured positive slope holding tube and vacuum break sometime and placement
of the balance tank below the inlet valve of the system. So these are all ensures there should not
be any recontamination. For example, if some milk packet stays in the holding tube and also
when the next batch of pasteurized milk comes then there may be a temperature difference with
this milk chunk and what what comes freshly and also the milk maybe cooled separated before
pasteurizing. 
So what we have done we have separated the skimmed milk with the creamy milk before
pasteurizing  itself  to  save  the  energy  and  also  energy  can  be  saved  if  the  cream  flow  is
homogenized  immediately  following  the separator and then added into the  skim milk  flow
because the skim milk need not homogenized because what we wanted is the fat part of the milk
should be homogenized in that way also we save some of the energy
Before that as I told and the safety measures and also there is important thing when we talk about
the batch process the atmosphere above the milk, which is nothing but a the head space. So the
head space should have at least greater than 3-degree temperature which is maintained in the
milk. For example, batch process ensures 63-degree temperature at almost 30 minute. So your
head  space  should  be  maintained  at  least  66-degree  centigrade  to  avoid  any  temperature
difference and also because it loses the heat, because the top layer is set to 63 if your air layer is
at normal temperature, there may be a del T.
And also we need to ensure all the valves and inlet tube, outlet tube everywhere, there should not
be any delT, delT in the sense if it has to be maintained at 63, so all the equipment should also be
at the same temperature and if at all there is a del T, it should be less than point 5 degree
Centigrade. So literally there should not be any temperature difference. So if at all then only
allowed is point 5-degree Centigrade only. So these are all safety measures we need to ensure it
will greatly reduce your post contamination process. It is not only pasteurization. So it is there
maybe post contamination as well.(Refer Slide Time: 25:23)
So then we are going to see one of the example for milk pasteurization. So the problem is
defined here, raw whole milk at 7 degree is to be pasteurized at 72 degree centigrade in a plate
heat exchanger at a rate of 5000 liter per hour then cool to 4 point 5 degree centigrade. So the
milk is pasteurized from 7 degree to 72 degree centigrade in a plate type heat exchanger. So the
volumetric flow rate is given here 5000 liter per hour then it is cool to 4 point 5 degree
centigrade. The hot water is supplied at 7500 liter per hour at 85 degrees centigrade and chilled
water has a temperature of 2 degree and leaves the heat exchanger at 4 point 5 degree centigrade.
Chilled water in the cooling section temperature and leaving temperature is given each heat
exchanger  plate  has  an  available  area  of  point  79  meter  square,  the  overall  heat  transfer
coefficients are calculated as 2890 Watt per meter squared Kelvin in the heating section, the
same overall heat transfer coefficient is given for cooling section as well, which is 2750 Watt per
meter squared Kelvin and 2700 Watt per meter squared Kelvin in the regeneration section. So
this  is  important  thing  75  percentage  of  the  heat  exchange  required  to  take  place  in  the
regeneration section. 
Calculate the number of plates required in each section and properties are given which is nothing
but density of the milk is given, density of the water is given, which is set hot water because 85
degrees centigrade. So here it is and the 1000 kg per meter cube at 2 degree, so which is nothing
but chilled water. So though the temperature  differences there in the heat exchanger, theseproperties are assumed to be constant throughout the range of temperature. The specific heat of
water is given that is 4 point 2 kilo Joules per kg Kelvin and specific heat of the milk is also
given. So our aim is to find out how many number of plates in the each section.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:41)
So we will write given data. One is milk side; another is hot water side. another is cold water
side. So milk volumetric flow rate is given which is nothing but 5000 liter per hour. So we would
be using in terms of Watts, so we can better convert this into kg per second. So for that you need
to multiply with the density, now here we convert in terms of seconds then later we will see,
meter cube per second we will convert and later we will see so 5 because 1 liter is 10 to the
power of minus 3 meter cube. So 5 and the 3600 seconds so which is coming around 1 point 39
into 10 to the power of minus 3 and water side, it is given as 7500 liter per hour.
Same conversion goes here. So 7 upon 3600 so which is nothing but 2 point 08 into 10 to the
power of minus 3, so this is a in meter cube per second. Later we will convert to kg per second.So the cold water side nothing is given so then milk Tin is given which is nothing but 7 degree
centigrade and Tout is given which is nothing but 72 degrees centigrade and in the hot water side
temperature is given 85 degree centigrade and density of the milk is given so which is nothing
but 1030 kg per meter cube and same way Cp is given which is nothing but 3 point 9 kilo Joules
per kg Kelvin and this side again density is given which is 958 kg per meter cube.
And Cp is given which is 4 point 2 kilo Joules per kg Kelvin. In the cold water side, so Tin is
given which is nothing but 2 degree centigrade and Tout is given which is nothing but 4 point 5
degree centigrade and density is given which is nothing but 1000 kg per meter cube and Cp is
given which is 4 point 2 kilo Joules per kg Kelvin. So this is all the properties we have written
and if we remember we just have seen there are three major sections, one is heating regeneration
and cooling. The regeneration section, the pasteurized milk which comes out of the holding tube
is used to preheat the raw milk. So that is nothing but a regeneration section.
So what are all the information given for all three sections we will just see this is heating section,
another is cooling section. So if we see so all the section they have given U. so in regeneration
section U is 2700 Watt per meter squared Kelvin and heating section U is 2890 Watt per meter
square Kelvin and then the cooling section U is 2750 Watt per meter squared Kelvin and the
important thing is in the regeneration section almost 75 percentage of the total Q is exchanged
between the raw milk and the pasteurized milk. So we are ready to calculate what we supposed
to calculate is, number of plates in each section, plates in all three sections. So we will start with
our regeneration section.
So regeneration section, it is told that 75 percentage of the heat exchange is done. So for that, I
need to know first what is Q. so Q I I will be calculating using MCp delta T for the pasteurized
milk. The mass is given, mass flow rate is not directly given, it is a volumetric flow rate is given.
So 1 point 39 into 10 to the power of minus 3 into density is nothing but 1030 and the Cp is
given 3 point 9 into 10 to the power of 3 because it is given in kilo Joules and the total
temperature gradient is 72 minus 7, so which is nothing but 65, so this goes, so the total Q what
you would be getting is 3 point 6 into 10 to the power of 5 Watt, so in that 75 percentage of this
Q is nothing but 2 point 72 into 10 to the power of 5 Watt, so this much heat is being exchanged
in the regeneration section. So another one is the 75 percentage of the temperature difference as well. Because if you see Q
was nothing but UA deltaT, so U is constant throughout and area is also so then whatever the 75
percentage of the heat exchange. We can also calculate the 75 percentage of the deltaT across the
regeneration section, so which is nothing but the total delT is 65. 65 into point 75 so which is
nothing but 48 point 75 degree centigrade. So this is delT which happens in the regeneration
section. Now, we will be able to tell, my raw milk enters at 7 degree and leaves at 7 plus we have
calculated the delT is 48 point 75 degree centigrade.
So totally it is 55 point 75 degree centigrade and the second one is pasteurized milk which comes
out of the holding tube, which enters at 72 degrees centigrade and leaves at again 72 minus 48
point 75 so which is nothing but 23 point 25 degree centigrade. So we know what is the delT
across the exchanger now, so delT across the regeneration section is, so this is 72, this is 55, so
72 minus 55 point 75 degree centigrade. So which is equivalent to 16 point 25 degree centigrade
16 point 25. So delT across the exchanger is 16 point 25 degree centigrade. So we already know
the formula which is nothing but UA delT. 
So what I supposed to calculate from here is A which is nothing but Q upon U delT. So we know
what is the heat exchange which is nothing but 75 percentage of the total heat so which we
calculated in the previous slide is 2 point 72 into 10 to the power of 5 upon U is given, U is given
in the regeneration section. So it is 2700 into delT we just calculated 16 point 25. So which
comes around 6 point 2 meter square. So each plate area, this is the total area, so number of
plates is nothing but 6 point 2 and each plate area is given I guess here somewhere.
Yeah  point  79.  So  point  79  so  which  comes  around  approximately  8  plates.  So  in  the
regeneration section the number of plates required would be 8 plates. So now we slowly move on
to next one is heating section. In the heating section what happens the raw milk, which heated
from 7 to 55 point 75 will be introduced into heating section and it will be heated to final
pasteurizer  temperature  of 72 degree centigrade.  So the raw  milk which comes  out of the
regeneration section at 55 point 75 degree centigrade is getting heated in the heating section and
leaves it 72 degree centigrade.
Here if I want to calculate the area, so what formula I would be using is Q upon U delTm delT it
is a logarithmic mean temperature. It is lon of delT. What is a clue about Q, Q we have alreadytold 75 percentage of the heat exchanges happening in the regeneration section. So remaining 25
percentage heat exchange happens in the heating section. So I have a clue so I can calculate how
much is 25 percentage and U is given but I supposed to calculate delTn, which is nothing but a
logarithmic delT. But I know in the heating section raw milk enters at 55 point 75 and leaves at
72, but if you see the problem, in the hot water side, you are given only the entering temperature
but I do not know what is a leaving temperature of the hot water in the heating section. 
So I would be calculating here the delT of hot water. So we know Q is equal to MCp delT. So
delT of the hot water is nothing but Q upon mass flow rate into Cp so Q I know so point 25 of
my total Q is nothing but 3 point 6 into 10 to the power of 5 so divided by hot water mass flow
rate is given so which is nothing but we calculated 0 2 point 08 into 10 to the power of minus 3.
So this is nothing but a volumetric flow rate that has to be multiplied with the density which is
nothing but 958 into Cp, Cp is nothing but 4 point 2 into 10 to the power of 3 because it is given
in the kilo Joules.
This will get cancelled. So we are getting the delT of about 11 degree centigrade. So I know delT
of milk the temperature difference which is happening in the heating section and the temperature
difference  which is happening in the hot water side. So then we will be able to calculate
logarithmic delT and Q already we have seen so this is nothing but 25 percentage of the total Q.
So from there I will be able to calculate what is a area. So hot water entering temperature is hot
water enters at  85 and leaves at 85 minus 11 because delT is 11. So that is nothing but 74 degree
centigrade. So the delT for hot water side as well as the raw milk side.
So the raw milk enters at 55 point 75 and it is heated to 72 degrees centigrade and we already
told it is a counter flow plate heat exchanger. So hot water enters at 85 and leaves at 74 degrees
centigrade. So if we calculate delT logarithmic so which is nothing but 74 minus 55 point 75
minus 85 minus 72 divided by lon of 74 minus 55 point 75 upon 85 minus 72 so which is coming
around 15 point 47 degree centigrade. So we already know what is that A, A is nothing but Q
upon U delT lon so U already we told point 25 into 3 point 6 into 10 to the power of 5, 25
percentage of the total heat requirement. So U is given for hot water 2890 Watt per meter squared
Kelvin and the logarithmic mean temperature difference is 15 point 47.So your area coming around 2 meter square. So number of plates is nothing but 2 upon point 79
so which is coming around approximately three plates. Then there comes a cooling section, so
cooling section the information given is pasteurized milk. So pasteurized to milk when it leaves
the regeneration section. So if you see it is set 23 point 25 centigrade. So it is cool to 4 point 5
degree centigrade. So from pasteurized milk, enters at 23 point 25 and leaves at 4 point 5 degree
centigrade So the temperature difference we suppose to find out by logarithmic mean and before
that we also have to see because the A is nothing but Q upon U delT lon, so in the cooling section
we found out what is the entering and leaving temperature of pasteurized milk, but the entering
and leaving temperature of the cold water is also given here. 
So delTm we know, we can calculate and we can calculate U but I do not know how to calculate
Q so that we supposed to calculate now, for example, if we see if we take the pasteurized milk,
which is nothing but Q, Q is the milk is 1 point 39 into 10 to the power of minus 3 volumetric
flow rate into density that is 1030 into the Cp is 3 point 9 so the temperature difference is nothing
but 23 point 25 minus 4 point 5. So which comes around 1 point 4 into 10 to the power of 5
Watts. So we know Q then we suppose to calculate the logarithmic mean temperature difference. 
So if we see in the cooling section, so one is the pasteurized milk enters at 23 point 25, which is
cool to 4 point 5. So the same way my cooling water enters at 2 degree centigrade and leaves at 4
point 5 degree centigrade. So delT lon so 23 point 25 minus 4 point 5 minus 4 point 5 minus 2
lon of 23 point 25 minus 4 point 5 divided by 4 point 5 minus 2. So the logarithmic mean
temperature is coming around 8 point 06 degrees centigrade. So area is nothing but Q upon U
delT lon, so just to we calculated Q, Q as 1 point 4 into 10 to the power of 5 divided by the U is
given 2750 and the logarithmic mean temperature gradient is 8 point 06. 
So if you substitute you will get around 4 point 7 meter square, so number of plates required is 4
point 7 upon point 79 which is around 6 plates. So number of plates you need to section
regenerations section around 8 plates. Then heating around 3 plates then cooling section around 6
plates. So this is the way heat exchanger plate type heat exchanger is designed for pasteurization
of milk in continuous process. And also here these values are approximate approximately 4 point
7. So for example, if you are taking more digits here, then you would be ending up with 7 or 8plates. I might have done some numerical mistakes also. So here the way how do you design is
important. So if there are any error, please, excuse me, while writing the numerical values. 
(Refer Slide Time: 47:52)
So then next we will see the effect of pasteurization actually pasteurization kills most of the
microorganisms in milk, but does not render milk sterile. So it should always be stored in the
refrigerator condition because the spores and thermoduric bacteria may be especially difficult to
destroy by that pasteurization temperature can be survived. So the pasteurized milk must be kept
under proper refrigeration temperature preferably below 4 degree throughout the distribution and
storage. And also this can be checked using standard plate count. 
So the U.S. regulation says the upper limit for the standard plate count after the pasteurization is
the 20000 CFU, colonies per ml. So anyway, the fresh pasteurized milk will have less than that
only. And also when you pass trays so what are all happens to the so this is based on microbial.
So we told that thermoduric bacteria may be still there in the pasteurized milk. So it has to be
stored under refrigeration. The count is 20000 CFU per ml. If you do it in the standard plate
count and there are certain enzymes which are not affected that is A and D but B1 B6 B9 B12
and C all are having 10 percentage 1 to 5 percentage 3 to 5 percentage and 1 to 10 percentage
and 5 to 20 percentage loss would be there.
And also these time temperature combinations during pasteurization. So we have told 63 degree
if it is a batch batch process 63 degree and 30 minute and if it is a continuous process it is
nothing but 72 degree and 15 seconds. So these time temperature combinations, it is no hard and
fast rule that these time temperature combinations would leave this percentage loss. So there is aquality consideration and optimization module of this course, so that talks about how to optimize
minimum destruction to the vitamins and maximum kill to the microorganisms.
There we derive the best time temperature combinations to reduce this percentage loss and there
are  some  denaturation  of  whey  proteins  also  happens  during  pasteurization  that  is  3  to  5
percentage and most heat-induced chemical reactions happens beyond 140 degree. So we did not
worry about much and in enzymatic ways and there are a denaturation of lipase and some
proteases which limits the formation of off flavors in the pasteurized milk which contributes to
extend  shelf  life  and  bacterial  origin  heat-resistant  lipase  and  some  proteases  cannot  be
inactivated at this pasteurization temperature.
And also sometimes what happens there is some enzymes called plasmin which is the plasmin is
increased by pasteurization because the enzyme which transforms plasminogen to plasmin so
that incubator, so that incubator get inactivated during pasteurization. So because of which then
there is a transformation of plasminogen into plasmin, so this also happens sometime and you
cannot do anything about certain heat resistant lipase and some proteases. So these are all effects
of pasteurization on enzymes.
(Refer Slide Time: 51:21)
And packaging wise actually packaging should protects milk from microbial contamination and
the intentional or unintentional addition of foreign objects. There should not be any further
contamination after pasteurization. So that is the basic characteristics of the packaging and also
you should block the passage of UV lights or any visible light, so which can lead to oxidized off
flavors and also some loss of heat light sensitive vitamins. 
So your packaging should be high enough to block the passage of UV lights and also it should be
opportunity for communicating with the consumer. So the package should be attractive and all
nutrition values should be printed on the packaging so it should be printable, so that way also. So
usually glass and polycarbonate bottles are preferred, preferred in the sense that is like they can
be cleaned and reused but the problem is while cleaning if we should make sure that there is no
recontamination and also the glass bottles are very much unsafe to handle, we should take extra
care to handle. 
So in that way this receives less attention when compared to plastic PET jars. So and there are
some paperboard carton, milk cartons but the problem is the opening, the opening and closing
and re-sealing. So usually they are excellent light barriers. So which also satisfy our one of the
three criteria, this criteria, but the problem is re-sealable caps. So once you are opening then you
may be suffering, I mean to reclose that opened package. So in that way, but nowadays new
cartons are also coming up with re-sealable caps.So that problem is well taken care. And the most prominent one is the HDPE. So this is the
choice of every dairy industry and they also have separate molding section to produce HDPE
based packaging and also PET jars is gaining popularity because of single serve blow molded
milk containers because it is high clarity and consumer appeal and also it has excellent oxygen
and water vapor resistance. So this has oxygen and water vapor permeability is very much low.
So that is because of that PET is the most wanted one. So to prevent light penetration the plastic
can be tinted with UV barriers. So there are some UV barriers are covers which is in film form.
So that will be wrapped through the plastic cans, so that also can be tried.
(Refer Slide Time: 54:02)
And the shelf life wise pasteurized milk can have a shelf life between 7 and 20 or even longer. So
this mainly influenced by the quality of the raw milk and post pasteurization contamination, so
we already talked about this is very much important and especially at packaging and temperature
control  during  storage  and  distribution.  So  these  two  places  where  post  pasteurization
contamination is very much happening. So we need to take care that as well. Their shelf life is
usually determined by microbial analysis or sensory analysis. So these two ways we do the post
pasteurization contamination test. 
Usually the microbial test are usually done after a certain storage time and temperature and the
result is correlated with the actual shelf life. So after that they do validation with the actual shelflife. There are two main techniques one is the Moseley Keeping Quality Test which involves
plating freshly processed milk and milk samples stored at freshly processed milk and milk
sample stored at 7 degree for 5 to 7 days on a standard plate count. So a large increase of
microbial growth between first and second platings indicates limited shelf life. 
For example, I am taking processed milk and I am also taking milk which is stored at 7 degrees
for 5 to 7 days. So then compare both and if there is some microbial growth, then there must be
some post contamination and the Virginia Tech Shelf Life test uses a preliminary incubation of
21 degrees centigrade for 18-hour and followed by plating on standard plates or petri film and
incubating for 24 to 48 hours at 21 degree respectively. So then they compare both and validate
how  much  is  the  contamination  and  the  main  cause  for  the  milk  spoilage  is  this  post
pasteurization contamination. Because we told that there is a FDV valve which ensures the
pasteurization temperature at the holding tube.
So only milk spoilage happens based on the post pasteurization only so that may be happening
during  storage  or  packaging  or  transportation  and  post  pasteurization  contamination  is  the
contamination of milk following the holding tube of the pasteurizer due to improperly cleaned
and sanitized cooling sections, process lines, valves, tanks, fillers and packaging materials. We
already  told  that  care  must be taken  in the  plant itself  to  ensure there  should not be any
temperature difference. But sometimes there may be improperly cleaned vessels or equipment
and  valves,  fillers  so  that  also  the  cause  for  those  pasteurization  beyond  your  storage  or
distribution or transportation or packaging.
Actually this contamination happens by psychrotrophic bacteria, which are either Pseudomonas
or Bacillus species is the most undesirable, this happens due to these two bacteria, but this is
mostly undesirable. Actually good process design and cleaning, good process design in the sense,
we ensure time temperature relation to get time temperature relation as we discussed yesterday,
so all the factors to be taken into account and cleaning and sanitation of both equipment and
environment and product temperature control from the point of the milk leaves the holding tube
until consumption or also required to obtain a good shelf life. 
So this is very much important and also the coliform bacteria count. So this will be done
immediately it leaves the holding tube because these coliform bacteria cannot survive in thepasteurization temperature. So when the pasteurized milk out of the holding tube, so if we can do
coliform  bacteria  count test then that also ensures any post pasteurization contamination is
happening or not. 
(Refer Slide Time: 58:02)
So these are all some references and additional resources. So you may would like to check for
further milk pasteurization details. Thank you all will meet for next lecture.