Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R.Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Lecture No. 5
Canning Operations
Good afternoon all. Today we are going to see about canning operations. 
(Refer Slide Time: 0:39)
So  the  outline  goes  like  this-  Cans  and  their  manufacture  and  the  principles  of  canning
operations and food handling in canning operations.
Refer Slide Time: 0:47)
So the  first thing  is  - Cans  and their  manufacture.  So before  filling  the  food for thermal
processing, so how normally the cans are being manufactured, We are going to just discuss very
briefly, because though the course is on thermal processing, so we do not concentrate much on
material processing.
So the manufacturing of cans, the process is called two-piece drawing and wall ironing. So the
procedure goes like this; first the cutting the blank. Then redrawing the cup, then trimming the
ears and the lid and filling and seaming. So this two-piece drawing and wall ironing process is
nothing but first if you see any cans, the cans the moment we talk about the canning operations,
the cans means, the first thing that comes to our mind is either steel cans or aluminium cans.
So steel cans, normally it started with the, canning industry started with the steels. But they, over
the  years  they  understood  the  premium  qualities  of  the  aluminium  over  the  steel.  So  the
aluminium, the advantage is actually any canning; we we require two basic properties. One
should be less weight. The another is nothing but to withstand the pressure; to withstand the
pressure inside, inside that is due to the fluid, which contains in the can.
If you are seeing in normal carbonated drinks cans, then you must be understanding that CO2
pressure that the can should be able to withstand. So the less weight as far as aluminium is
concerned, so it withstand the weight is about 14 grams, less than 14 grams. And it can
withstand, these thin walls can withstand around 600 Kpa of pressure. Not only that one, then
it also offers an attractive background.
It offers attractive background for labelling because this is another one of the main criteriabecause now a days customers want to see the labelling and buy the things. And the labelling
also should be attractive and the can should provide the background which is in coherence for
decorative labelling. And also it chills quickly, aluminium and also it is, to recycle it is easy.
So  all  these  properties  makes  aluminium  superior  than  the  steel  cans.  So,  what  the  can
manufacturing process, first we will get the aluminium ingot. So this aluminium ingot will be
formed into sheets of particular thick. So these sheets again made into blanks. So these are all
called blanks of particular diameter. So this we call it as a blank. So if you see that is cutting the
blank.
From the sheets they produce the blanks and they are redrawing the cup. So this cup of particular
diameter, so will be redrawn to cans of this size. So your height will be increased and your
diameter of the can will be decreased. So that is the way it draws. So after redrawn, the next
process is trimming the airs. Not only the drawing to a particular height.
So this bottom part should also be made by the punch in this way to contract the pressure from
the inside lid. So it will be bulged kind of this one. So then after that when the redrawing
happens, you will not get a particular shape of the can here. So it will be something of this kind.
So this is being trimmed to get the proper shape of the can. So after the trimming is done, so then
the lid is kept above the can.
So in the lid, maximum maybe of various alloys. It need not be of the same as that of the
aluminium. It may be various alloys maybe used for the lid. And lid normally stronger than the
thin walled can. So the walls are thin here. And also if you see along the length, so the bottom
portion will be bit stronger than the top portion one, top one. So it is drawn in such a way a way
that your bottom portion of the cans will be stronger than the upper portion of the can.
So after the lid is done, then they will have that opening lid. So that opening lid will be of very
thin compared to that lid material. So then after the lid is done, then there is a seaming process.
So the seaming process is when the cup is drawn, after the trimming, so this top portion of the
can will be having a flanch outside. So when the lid is made, it will be made in such a way, this
kind of thing.
The seaming is nothing but the pressing these two, so that the leakage will be avoided and also
during thermal processing. So it will reduce the expansion of the material. So that is the way the
seaming is being done. So then you will have this opening. This opening may be of differentmaterial than the lid. So when you pull it up, it opens and give you the passage to drink your
beverages or whatever the material you can take it out.
So this is normally overall process of cans manufacture. Anyway, we are not going to get into
detail because the material processing is not of our interest in this course. So the processes are,
this whole process is called two-piece drawing and wall ironing because both your body portion
as well as the bottom portion of the can is being manufactured in a single blank what you cut it
from the sheet. So then cut the blank, then redrawing the cup, then trimming the ears to get the
same size, then lid, then fill and seaming. After filling, this is this happens during thermal
processing itself. So after filling, the seaming is done.
(Refer Slide Time: 8:21)
So now we are going to discuss about what are all the canning principles. So the first one is the
process of packaging a food in a container and subjecting it to a thermal process for the purpose
of extending its life, useful life. So normally all thermal processes are being done just to extend
its useful life. So how it can be done? There are two things associated with it because we wanted
to kill the disease causing microorganisms. As well as it is also included with pathogenic
organisms. And also to control the growth of any organisms at that particular temperature.
So if these two are taken care, then obviously the shelf life of the product would be increase. So
the, the moment we talk about the cans, then normally this is coming into our memory. But the
principles  and  operations,  whatever  we  do,  that  is  applicable  for  glass  jars,  plastics  foil-
laminated pouches, semi grid plastic trays, bowls as well as metal cans of any one of the several
shapes, including a cylindrical cans, oval cans, oblong, and rectangular.Whatever maybe the shape and whatever may be the material, the principles and operations are
same. And also the same principles and operations are valid for aseptic packaging. So, aseptic
packaging, you are sterilizing the food and the container, both will be done prior to filling and
sealing, before itself. So here we do the filling and sterilization together, but aseptic processing,
sterilizing the food and the container prior to filling and sealing. Sealing is nothing but seaming. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:07)
So  the  basics  are,  actually  the  thermal  processing  can  be  done  in  two  ways.  One  is  the
pasteurization, so which accounts the temperature in between between 65 to 95 degree to kill
pathogenic organisms which is nothing but a disease causing microorganism and extend the
product lifetime and a refrigerated storage. So whenever you pasteurize, so you need to store it in
a refrigerated condition, but whereas the sterilization is done in the temperature range between100 to 150 degree.
So  this  indefinite  product  life  at  ambient  temperature.  So  you  can  store  it  at  ambient
temperatures itself. So whatever the milk tetra pack you get, so that is sterile milk. And normally,
low acid canned foods packaged in hermetically sealed containers. What we mean by low acid
canned foods is nothing but the pH greater than 4.6 and water activity is greater than point 85. So
this is called low acid food. So normally pH less than 7, 7 is a neutral, we call it as a acid, acid
food. so in that, so this 4.6 is given, so below than that we call it as acid food. So maybe for
example, 0 to 4.6, 4.6 to 7 we call it as a low acid food. So water activity is nothing but amount
of water present in the food.
So if it is greater than 0.85. If pH is greater than 4.6 within 7, then we call it as a low acid
food. So in this condition, combination supports the growth of Clostridium botulinum, we call
it as a Cbot. So this is a spore forming bacterium that produces exotoxin which is one of the
most deadly neuroparalytic toxins so till now it is known. It is almost found out in 1920s, if I
am correct. So this is the basis for all the thermal processing. So this organism is nothing but a
deadliest organisms. So at this condition, which is nothing but pH greater than 4.6 and water
activity greater than 0.85, so it favors the condition of growth of Clostridium botulinum so
which is nothing but a Cbot.
So it occurs both cultivated and forest soils. So Cbot appears in cultivated, forest soils, sediments
of streams, lakes, coastal waters and intestinal tracts of fish, mammals and grills, crabs and other
shell fish. So everywhere it is almost available, everywhere. But the favorable condition is this
particular condition: pH is greater than 4.6 and water activity is greater than 0.85. So based on the
acid nature of the food if it is 4.6, then most of the vegetables, fresh meats, and seafood comes
under this category. 
Low acid food, already we talked about but tomatoes require less severe, so all these conditions, if
it less than, then we do not require sterilization condition. Less severe pasteurization itself is can
be  done.  But  in  that  tomatoes  also  require  less  severe  treatment,  which  is  nothing  but  a
pasteurization. But if pH is greater than 4.6, that definitely requires sterilization condition. And
water activity greater than 0.85, fresh fruit, vegetables, and meats all come under this category. So
less than 0.85, we all know it is a dried food, honey, and salami. This is another kind of variety.(Refer Slide Time: 13:50)
So  when  we  talk  about  thermal  processing,  there  are  3  major  boxes  to  be  ticked.  One  is
thermobacteriology, so which talks about microbiological science. So another is heat penetration
testing. So this is our domain that is nothing but physical science which talks about all thermal
processing. And both combined together, and it should be validated and alterated. Otherwise for
example, these both are interlinked together.
So we already told why we are doing any thermal processing, or pasteurization or sterilization to
kill pathogenic organisms or to control the food spoilage organisms. So we require information
from the microbiological science to fix any thermal processing parameters. So when we do so,
we normally do not try everything in the commercial production, commercial production in the
industrial level. So what we do, most of them are laboratory experiments. So when it goes to
commercial plants, before going into that, we need to do validation and alteration.
So what thermobacteriology talks about, thermobacteriology talks about equivalent minutes in F
at a specified temperature T with a specific z value. So this F value, and z value. So we will be
seeing in our subsequent lectures which is nothing but kinetic parameter estimation. So as of
now, we call it as F value, z value. So the design is F is a function of T, z value and temperature.
So this again the function of the numbers and resistance of microorganisms on the product, I
already told you. And end point of the preservation process. End point in the sense: so for
example initially I have almost 10 to the power of 3 spores of Cbot in the food. So I reduce to
10 to the power minus 9 spores.
So this is nothing but 12 log reduction. So for this 12 log reduction, how long it takes. So endpoint of the preservation. So end point which contains only 10 to the power minus 9 pores,
spores. So F of (Tz) value, depends upon these 2 factors. The numbers and resistance of the
microorganisms  as  well  as  the  end  point  of  the  preservation  process.  When  goes  to  heat
penetration testing, so the heating characteristics of the slowest heating zone of the product in
container. When we talk about the canning, if it a rectangular or cylindrical can of vertical shape
kept in vertical line, so the axis, so the midpoint of the can is nothing but the slowest heating
zone.
So what happens, when you keep it in the retort. Retort is nothing but a pressure vessel. So when
the steam is on, the heating medium starts heating the can. So the heat has to penetrate from the
wall, to the wall to inside. So the, this portion will be heated first then the slowest is nothing but
midpoint.  So determine  experimentally, this  will  be  either  time  temperature  data  or heating
parameters. So to know how long it takes from it reaches to the sterilization temperature, which is
nothing but; normally reference is 121.1 degree centigrade.
So how long does it take from outer wall to the slowest heating zone that is nothing but the time
temperature data. So this can be done by experimental or that also can be done by modelling and
simulation. So either it will be in terms of heating parameters, or it will be in terms of time and
temperature  data.  And processing conditions  which include  initial  product temperature,  it  it
requires. And heating medium temperature, I told you, so heating medium is nothing but a steam.
So that temperature initially my product is at what temperature and type of retort.
Type of retort in the sense, the pressure vessel what we use and the type of packaging. The
packaging does not mean that only cans. So the canning operations principles can be used for
pouches and we have already seen. So these 4 are, 4 are very important parameters when you do
the  heat  penetration  testing.  So  the  design  process  performs  as  required  under  commercial
conditions.  Whether  when  I  scale  up  to  commercial  conditions,  the  same  reduction  of
microorganisms happens at that particular temperature and particular time or not, that we need to
validate.(Refer Slide Time: 18:46) 20:01, 22:24
So then process design. The design of heating process is necessary to obtain microbial control
endpoint for the specific product packaging system. Microbial control endpoint is I already told. I
am getting it from 10 to the power of 3 to 10 to the power of minus 9. And process time at the
heating medium temperature to produce the endpoint requirement at the slowest heating zone in
the con,. So the heating medium here is steam. So I am using steam to sterilize my can. So to
produce the endpoint requirement. Endpoint requirement is nothing but 12 log reduction in the
microbial count in microbial count.
And at the slowest heating zone. So for example, to produce this 12 log reduction I need to
maintain a 121 degree centigrade for 0.2 minutes means. so my slowest heating zone which is
nothing but the axis of the cylindrical can should reach 121.1 degree centigrade, at that particulartime. So that is the way the process should be designed. So let me put it in this way. So here is
your  thermobacteriology  which  is  nothing  but  a  microbial  science.  So  here  is  your  heat
penetration testing which is nothing but, so here this can be done in experimental way and or
modelling also.
So which gives me the heating parameters, so this is interrelated because it can change. If it is a
modelling, then you have the flexibility to change your initial temperature, and type of retort, and
type of packaging, everything. So these both goes to the design processes. Sometimes it goes,
both goes to design process, so then after that there is a validation before it goes to design process
which combines thermobacteriology and heat penetration testing and come up with the particular
endpoint. How much temperature to be maintained and how much is the time for the temperature
to reach the slowest heating zone.
So  then  after  that,  it  validates.  Then  if  there  is  any, if  that  is  not  being  followed  in  the
commercial conditions, then it goes back. to change this condition and check, so that means that
we have not understood probably the heat penetration testing parameters correctly. Or there may
be a problem with the initial bacterial count. So that was not calibrated properly. So then then
this goes on alteration. So then finally, if this is validated, then you go for process establishment.
So this is the way, this is combined.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:25)
So the moment we talk about the thermobacteriology, it is all about the potential microbiological
contaminants in the food and time temperature levels required to destroy them. The influence of
food  itself  on  the  destruction  rates.  So  these  3  combined  together,  to  give  the
thermobacteriological science. So here as I said earlier z, F and one more is Dt values are
important. Anyway we are going to see much in detail in the kinetic parameter calculation. So
the Dt value is nothing but time in minutes at constant temperature to inactivate 90 percentage of
the target organisms present in the food.
So this goes like this, so this is your constant T, T equal to constant. So this is nothing but time.
So this is your log reduction, probably, 0.1, 1, 10, 100, something like this. So this is a linear
line. So this is 1 and this is 1. So 1 log reduction is this, so what is the time taken. So that is
nothing but a Dt. So this  Dt value describes  the time  effect of heat on the  population  ofmicroorganisms exposed at a constant temperature to precise time period without influence of
heating and cooling. So, what does it mean by heating and cooling here is so as I told earlier,
when you keep the can in retort pressure vessel.
When the steam is on, it will take some time for the retort to reach the steam temperature. So
that is nothing but a come up time. So that is the time taken for the retort to reach the heating
medium temperature. And after once the sterilization is done at a particular temperature than it
has to come back to the normal atmospheric temperature, so that is nothing but a cooling period.
So this Dt is without the influence of heating or cooling period. So this means, immediately your
retort is on for steam and at the end of the process the cooling is started. So the this time is
without the influence of heating and cooling period.
And the, normally the thermal destruction test, how we conduct in the food sample is, first we
use small amount of food samples and incubated with the known levels of microorganisms, so I
know my initial count of organisms. Then the samples contained in a specifically designed, low
profile TDT cans or glass tubes, are heated in chambers capable of rapidly heating the sample.
Rapidly heating the sample in the sense, here we avoid that come up time. So the sample to a
precise temperature, for example if it has to be maintained at 50 degree then I have, I will
maintain  at  50  degree.  Holding  the  precise  time  period  and  rapidly  cooling  to  sublethal
temperatures, so that is nothing but back to normal temperature.
And common heating devices, so this I perform in the lab. So I will take a glass tube and put the
small amount of food samples and the organisms with known levels, with the, with the known
initial concentration. Then it will be rapidly heated, then cooled back to sublethal temperature. In
between,  for  each  time  interval,  we  will  take  out  a  sample  and  check  for  how  much
microorganism count is there in that sample. So it depends upon the microorganisms taken, and
food medium, and exposure temperature. This we already know. So actually the Dt, the D is
nothing but the death rate constant. 
At 121 degree centigrade, the value of C.botulinum, C C.bot, is normally taken as 0.2 minutes.
So heat is spore suspension in a phosphate buffer. So why we use the phosphate buffer is to
maintain the pH level because we already know it is always at what pH and what water activity.
So normally it was taken as a, it was measured as 2.78 minute for 12 log reduction. 12 log
reduction in the sense, if I take a initial spores of 10 to the power of 3, it will become 10 to the
power minus 9. So this correcting the data to come up to, come up time. Come up time in thesense the heating medium temperature reaches after this minus this.
Almost 73, okay, after 33 minute, sorry, 0.33 minutes. So this come up time reduced and (2.5)
2.45 to achieve the same lethal effect. Hence so 2.4 minutes for 12, 12 log reduction. So divided
by 12. So this is nothing but 0.2 approximately. So this is the way normally how we calculate D in
D using experimental temperatures. But the moment you see in the canning operations, when the
steam is on, then slowly the temperature changes from the can wall to the lowest heating zone. So
in that case, I would require the temperature, the time temperature curve because it is not a
constant temperature, my temperature is kept on increasing, so I would require this D values at
different temperatures to get my heating parameters done correctly.
So then another value which uses is nothing but z value. So here a series of TDT tests are
conducted to determine the effect of different temperatures. So that is why my thermal process
path. We already told. this is the temperature. So when the steam is on, it will take some time for
come up then it starts increasing to the endpoint temperature. So I would require for the time
versus temperature. So what is my D value. So for that on the thermal resistance of an organisms.
The thermal resistance curve relates time for 1 log kill with the kill temperature.
So the z value is inverse slope of the curve and represent the number of degrees of temperature
required for the curve to transverse 1 log cycle. So the z value is nothing but, here is my, so this is
a temperature. So this is nothing but 100 degree something. So this is, so how long it, what is the
temperature range. So z value is the inverse slope of the curve represents the number of degrees
of temperature required for the curve to transverse 1 log cycle. So this is nothing but Dt value. So
for this T1 temperature, so this is my Dt value. For T2 temperature, this is my Dt value. So to 1
log reduction in the Dt value, so what is the temperature difference.
So that is nothing but z value. z value denotes number of degrees of temperature required to effect
a 10 fold change in time to achieve the same lethal effect. So higher z value means we know
already, the greater change in process temperature is required for the same change in destruction
of organisms. So higher temperature means this slope is something like this. So this 10 and this
will go bit. Let me put it, something of this kind. So the second one requires less temperature
change.
So that is a way and z value depends spore type which strain we use and heating system, test
substrate, that is nothing but a food on which it grows, and method of calculation. So everything,
z value also depends upon. Z value of 10 degree centigrade is the best recommendation forcalculating LACF, LACF in the sense low acid food sterilization process. So now we understood
that for C.bot, the D, the reference temperature is 121. degrees centigrade. And which is nothing
but 0.2 minute for 1 log reduction. And also z value is nothing but 10. So LACF the main
organism which grows is our C.bot.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:48)
So then the lethality. All  temperatures  above the minimum  value have lethal  effect.  And it
contributes to the destruction of the microorganisms. So the lethal rate describes through thorough
use of z value. z value you require and reference temperature. And this T is nothing but time
temperature history of the heating process. Effect of temperature on the microbial destruction
with respect to the effect of a certain reference temperature. So the formula goes like this, L equal
to 10 to the power of T minus T reference divided by z. For example, we know this is the
reference temperature. So at this one, this becomes 1.
So this becomes 1, so this becomes 0.1. This is 0.01 maybe. So this becomes 10.. This Ft is
nothing but 12 log reduction. So 12 log reduction, so we already know for 121 for C.bot., at z
value of 10, your reference value is nothing but 121.1 degree. So we know what is the value. This
is nothing but 2.4 minute. We already calculated before. So this becomes 24 minutes. So this
becomes 240 minutes, because 10-fold increase, 10 fold increase. So this probably becomes 0.24
minute.(Refer Slide Time: 32:29)
So that is lethality and sterilization value is nothing but, we will integrate over total time t, 0 to t.
The parameter that accumulates lethal effect does the function of time during the thermal process
in the sterilization value. So F naught value is specific for food, container, processing condition,
processing system and thermal processes. So we cannot say this this F naught value for example,
some food samples I found it or the canned process F value is so and so. F naught is nothing but
when my T reference is 121.1 and my z reference is 10, then only it is called F naught. So this F
naught is specific for container food.
So this is specifically for C.bot. So these are all the factors which depends upon, so the F naught
value is equivalent value of the process in terms of minutes if no time is involved in heating to
120. So no time in heating is involved means come up timeSo which means the retort to become
the steam temperature, and cooling to sublethal temperatures. And F naught value of 3 minute is
generally accepted as a realistic, minimum botulinum thermal process that will produce LACFs.
So I already told C.bot is most toxic one. So that 2.4 is rounded off to 3 minute. So this is the
reference value being followed.(Refer Slide Time: 33:59)
And also when it goes to commercial sterility, we need to be specific with the conditions what
we use. The 3 minute may not be sufficient enough for if the 3 minute how we calculate it is 12
log reduction. 12 log reduction when my initial spores were 10 to the power of 3. But here the F
naught depends on the initial bacterial level of the food. And also physical parameters, the style,
consistency, particle size which is in the food, and liquid to solid ratio of the food, everything
comes together when we calculate F naught.
And food container, whether it is a can or pouch and processing system. So whether you have any
agitator inside. So that also comes into play. And conditions of the storage and distribution.
Where  do you  want  to  store  natural  and added  ingredients  that  prevents  the  spoilage.  For
example, I also took the example of beverage cans. But sometimes, they come up with the added
ingredients, to prevent the spoilage of the food. So normally, that will not come under canning
operations as well. And economics and the general experience of the food processor.
And  for  example,  F  naught  of  15  to  20  minutes  should  be  maintained,  high  temperature
geographical  area. For example,  what happens  here is, there are bacterias  which are called
thermopiles. So they are very much heat resistant. And also if they are present in the food which
which escapes sterilization process. When it is stored in the high temperature geographical area,
it starts growing. So that is why higher minutes, higher F naught values being used when the
storage condition is high temperature geographical. 5 to 7 normally moderate temperature area
and 8 to 12 minutes for products heated with induced agitation. Agitation improves the mixing.
Canned food with equal protection, regardless of the initial numbers of C.bot spores, the heatprocess F naught value should always satisfy a constant agreed endpoint of the surviving spores.
So this is very much important. Though we say 12 log reduction, there is no proper source for
that, why I need to maintain 12 log and also as I said earlier, the initial bacterial level of the food
product is also important when we use such a F naught value from the calculation.
(Refer Slide Time: 36:24)
And heat penetration testing, normally, how it is being done in our laboratory is, the temperature
history of the product during the process and combined with the thermal resistance information
of the organism of concern allows us to calculate  the length of the thermal process at the
specified process temperature. So this we already discussed. I need a microbiological science to
fix what is the temperature I would require for sterilization. And physical science will tell me
how long it will take to reach that temperature, my coldest point of the food. To reach that
particular sterilization temperature, how long does it take, that is nothing but a HP test. So
normally how do I measure experi we told that there are 2 methods can be applied.
One is experimentally I can measure. And another is models, using equations. So normally non
projecting style TC receptacles are used and it is hard-wired to the potentiometer. So it is nothing
but a thermocouple based potentiometer is used to measure the temperature. And when we are
using the thermocouples, we should be a bit careful about, how we are, where we are keeping the
thermocouple and what kind of thermocouple we use. So normally it should be measure the
slowest heating zone, and which is determined a priori. So sometimes we called it, because it is a
regular shape of the gun, so I can tell that if it is only liquid food is there, so I can tell that access
of the can is nothing but my slowest heating zone.But if it has some solids, or it has some natural convection or forced convection, so these are all
the also the parameters and whether the can is stacked vertically or horizontally, so that also
comes to play to determine slowest heating zone. So that we will see in subsequent lectures. So
that, this point, how I, one has to determine which is the slowest heating zone. There are some
ancillary  testing  for that.  And if the  products  have  natural  or induced  convection,  the  TC,
thermocouple of small diameter is used.
Because if the particles are induced by natural convection or forced convection, then you should
not your thermocouple, what you keep inside the can to measure the temperature that should not
hinder the particle moment. And also the TC support material should have similar thermal
properties for the if the food is, if the heat transfer happens by conduction, then the TC material
also should be having the same thermal properties of the solid food. Otherwise the conduction
happens between the food to thermocouple. And normally it it it alters the TC junction. And
whatever the temperature you are measuring, that may not be the correct temperature.
(Refer Slide Time: 39:26)
And these are all the various factors affecting heat penetration. So processing temperature we
already told, processing time, processing media. This we will see when we talk about the heat
penetration, heating curve. We will see what are all the different processing medium available.
And initial temperature and temperature distribution within the container. And size and shape of
the  container  we  already  told  whether  it  is  a  cylindrical  or  a  rectangular  or oblong  shape,
everything.  The  container  orientation  and  distribution,  whether  it  is  stacked  vertically  or
horizontally.
And agitation of containers during process that I already told it the mixing improves the heat
transfer. And what is the asterisk, asterisk means so this is different when without agitation and
with agitation. Agitation we will have pedals inside it. The container fill and head space. So
container we will not fill total cans with the food material, we will be having some head space. Sothat  also  affects  the  heat  penetration.  Product  formulation  and  preparation  procedures  and
proportion of the solids in the liquids.
Solid to liquid of the food material and size, shape, arrangement, and composition of the food
particles because the, if it is a liquid then natural convection will be different than liquid having
the particles. And slowest heating zone also would be different when you have pure solid food or
pure liquid food or suspended liquid food with suspended particles. And Consistency of the
product, whether it is a liquid, or suspended solids, or emulsion, or pure solid food, it also affects.
And product drained weight after processing and style of the container, whether it is a metal
container or plastic container. Vacuum or air remaining in the container, so this is nothing but
related  to head space and temperature  distribution  in processing vessel we already told. So
processing vessel in the sense when you steam on, how long does it take for come and all those
information.  And  operating  conditions;  come  up  time,  sequence  of  events,  and  controller
functions, and rotational speed, everything comes into play. Location and type of the temperature
sensor, this just we discussed.
How, where you place the thermocouple and what kind of thermocouple you place, everything
and ability to test retort to duplicate commercial conditions. So commercial conditions in the
sense we already told how do we perform TDT, the test we just take small amount of food in the
glass tubes and perform the heat penetration test but when you scale up to commercial conditions
how far your experimental results will be matching with the commercial conditions that is also
important(Refer Slide Time: 42:08) 
And thermal process calculation as we discussed already. General method, general method is
nothing but a experimental method, so here there is no flexibility to change the process time and
heating parameters. For example, if I am I am taking in the glass tube some of the food particles
and initial known microbial counts then what I will be doing is for each two minute I will be
taking out my sample each two minute and calculate my microorganisms level.
That is the way I I would be giving the microbial count and after that so I will take a food
particle in the can then I will place my thermocouple and each two minute or three minute I will
start measuring the temperature from the can wall to the slowest heating zone. So I do not have
the flexibility, for example, if someone wants what happens at third minute I will not be able to
tell, because I do not have the particular data.So that is what there is no flexibility in change the process time or heating parameters or initial
product temperature and predict their influence on F naught. And also the reverse is also not
possible. But in formula method what I will be having is I will have T as a function of t. So here
I need to substitute just t at any minute. For example, if I want to point 1th minute or point 2
minute, and I can just substitute my time and get all the values. And also, it is the shape of the
curve, heating curve.
We already told the time versus temperature curve. So that depends upon the heating lag factor j
and temperature response parameter that is a function of slope of the heating curve, fh, f2, Xbh.
So these all terminologies we will see in the lecture of heating curve. So here we generally put it
as a parameters. The shape of the respective heating curves are defined in terms of these
parameters. There you get direct values. Here you, everything you get in terms of formula. And
the simple heating curve conduction or by forced convection by mechanical.
Actually the simple heating curve in the sense straight, the straight line heating curve. When you
plot time versus temperature, this you get when there is a conduction or forced convection or
induced by mechanical agitation of the container. But broken heating curves normally occur
when the product heating happens by natural convection in still retorts, we already told. So I
have a retort where my cans are stacked. So here there will be a steam sprays through which my
steam is sprayed inside the retort.
So it will take some time to reach to that steam temperature. Then after that the product starts
getting heated. So the broken heating curves normally happens when still retorts. In the formula
method, the temperature of the food during the process is described by equations that utilize HP
factors. So we already told heating, cooling and transitional phases of the processing cycle.
These expressions are substituted in equation of F naught. So if you remember your F equation.
So this is nothing but 0 to t, T minus T reference upon z, so 10 to the power of. So this T is
nothing but this value, T as a function of f of t. So this is reference temperature this is z. So this
equation whatever we get, in the previous slide, so we told formula method everything we will
we will get in function of temperature.
So that will be substituted here to calculate F. So determine the influence of various factors on
the thermal process delivered to the product. So the one advantage is, we have told that were
four important parameters: type of packaging, type of retort and initial product temperature so
everything matters when you get F. So but here you have the flexibility to change any number ofparameters because it is in terms of equations, I need not change initial product temperature then
once more perform the experiments. So this gets the flexibility.
(Refer Slide Time: 46:18)
And the process validation is done in confirmation of the design process to provide assurance that
the design F naught. Design F naught in the sense, so if you remember our earlier slides, so we
discussed about thermobacteriology, we discussed about heat penetration testing, so the now we
are in the design process. So after combining these two in terms of F, So F talks about the T which
is the function of time and T reference and z value for that microorganism. So we combined both
and designed F not we come up with.
Alright and now here we are going to do the process validation. So design level of sterilization
process microbial survival probability of about 10 to the power of minus 9 spores. This will not
harm and 10 to the power of minus 6 for nonpathogenic organism. Using the same organism is
not possible. So what happens is when I am testing so even if I am microbiologist, I will not
choose this C.bot.. So and even if you are in the if the testing is done in the commercial plants,
so it is not good to have such kind of pathogenic organisms in the plant itself. So normally we
use the surrogate organisms so which is nothing but putrefactive Mesophiles or thermophiles so
PA3679, which is nontoxic, not like C.bot and I into the cans before the containers are sealed
and processed
 So the testing is done using PA3679. This is also heat resistant higher than C.bot and spore
forming organisms. So one thing is this is nontoxic and very safe to handle. So the process
validation is done using this particular organism. So normally what we do is; after the cans are
received thermal process, they are incubated. So first what we do is, we inoculate the calibrated
bacterial spores. So that means my initial concentration is known. Known initial concentration is
inoculated. Then after the can received the thermal process, so at the end of 2 to 4 weeks of
incubation, all the cans are examined. The number of can that show the evidence of bacterialgrowth is determined.
So the common biological validation to carry out an inoculated pack where this is 10 to the
power 5 resistant PA3679 spores. So this is conducted in between 1 to 1.5 in phosphate buffer
are added to each container of product before processing. After processing inoculated contains
are incubated. So the initial concentration, they have taken as 10 to the power of 5 and the this is
the maintained condition is phosphate buffer, 1 to 1.5. This is much low to maintain the pH and
acceptable process should produce greater than 5 log reduction of the PA3679. So if that is the
case, then it passed the validation. Otherwise, the alteration should be carried out. So that means
we have not understood any either, either our thermal process correctly or sometimes there may
be a problem in the thermobacteriology as well.
So the process validation, so to cut short. The process validation is done using some other
organism, which is nothing but a PA3679. So the conditions are 10 to the power of 5 initially
taken and check the condition for 5 log reduction. So if it pass the test, then the conditions
whatever we have designed, that is nothing but F naught value is applicable to the commercial
sterilization.  Otherwise  we  need  to  back  retreat.  We  need  to  change  either  the
thermobacteriology studies, or we need to conduct heat penetration testing, then come up with a
new F naught, then again validate. So if it is acceptable then go for process establishment.
(Refer Slide Time: 50:22)
Canning operations are very much wide varieties, so I request you to refer some of the additional
resources  for this  particular  lecture.  So these are all some of the references  and additional
resources. Thank you.