Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Chemical Engineering Department
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Lecture No. 7
 Kinetics of Reactions
Good morning all, today we are going to see the topic of kinetics of reaction.
(Refer Slide Time: 0:40)
In this topic, today we are going to cover kinetic expressions, order of reactions, determination of
order, rate constant and rate of reaction, inactivation kinetics, D and z values.(Refer Slide Time: 0:53)
So the first one we are going to talk about kinetic expressions. So normally any reaction, for
example, if A gives B, so this A is nothing but a reactant and B is nothing but a product. So how
do I represent the concentration of reacting species with respect to time, so that is nothing but
kinetic expressions.
Here which is nothing but dc upon dt so this c is nothing but concentration of the reacting
species. So this minus sign is for, when the reaction happens the reactant A is getting depleted
over the time. So which is equivalent to kn and c power n. So what is this k, this k is nothing but
a rate constant and this n is nothing but a order of reaction. So in general so this n is nothing but
the order of reaction. 
So this c is nothing but the concentration of the reactant to the power n. n is nothing but a order
of reaction. So the course what we are dealing with here is the thermal processing of food. So in
the thermal processing the one of the main process is nothing but sterilization which is nothing
but a cleaning of microorganisms using a temperature. So this c talks about concentration of
microbial count for example, initially I have particular microbial count so over the time at
particular temperature how the microbial count is getting reduced. 
And sometimes it may be the enzyme activity. So enzyme activity is also related to the food
processing. So when I am going to kill about the particular cell concentration at particular time atparticular temperature. So how my enzyme activity of the food is getting changed, so the same
may be enzyme activity as well and sometime it talks about the nutrient retention. So when I am
going to heat the food for a particular time to kill microorganisms so how much of nutrient is
retented in particular time at particular temperature that that concentration also I would be
interested. And sometimes it is colour, sometimes it is texture, flavor, etc. So this t is nothing but
a time and kn is nothing but rate constant where n is the order of reaction.
(Refer Slide Time: 3:34)
So we have already told about the kinetic expressions which is nothing but minus dc upon dt
equal kn c power n. So based on the n, whether it is 0 or 1 or 2, the reactions are categorized into
zeroth order reaction, first order reaction, second order reactions sometimes fractional orders of
reaction also exist, for example n equal to 0.3, n equal to 0.2 1.2, etc. So how are we going to
derive such a kinetic expression for different orders of reaction that we are going to see in next
slides. (Refer Slide Time: 4:13)
So my general kinetic expression goes like minus dc dt which is equal to kn c power n. So this n
is nothing but order of reaction. So if I know order of the reaction priori so for example my n is
equal to 0. So that means it is zeroth order reaction. So how do I write kinetic expression dc upon
dt which is nothing but k naught c power 0, so which is nothing but k naught. 
So now I integrate over initial concentration c naught and final concentration c over the time
zeroth minute to t th minute. So this is nothing but 1 so this is k naught so here dc dt is nothing
but minus k naught so which implies dc is nothing but minus k naught 0 to t dt, the same way my
concentration goes from initial concentration c naught tofinal concentration c. So this becomes c
minus c naught which is nothing but minus k naught into t. 
So c is nothing but c naught minus k naught into t. So at any particular time I will be able to
calculate my concentration when order of reaction is nothing but a zeroth order. I would require t
time and rate constant k naught, k naught here is rate constant, so this is nothing but my initial
concentration of the microorganism or nutrient or enzyme activity anything. So I would be able
to tell what is my c at time equal to t if my order is zeroth order. (Refer Slide Time: 6:25)
So if my order is a first order, my n equal to 1 that is nothing but a first order, first order reaction.
So here I would be able to write dc upon dt which is nothing but k1 c power 1 which is nothing
but c. So dc upon c which is nothing but minus k1 dt, so I will integrate over initial concentration
to final concentration, initial minute to time t th minute. So, which is nothing but lon c upon c
naught which is nothing but minus k1 t. So if you want to calculate the concentration at any point
of time c naught e power minus k1 t. 
So if I want to calculate at particular time t, what is my concentration so from the initial
concentration and from first order rate constant so this is nothing but first order rate constant. So
this is my initial concentration. The same thing for n equal to 2, n equal to 2, it is nothing but a
second order reaction, so c naught to c, so dc upon c square which is nothing but minus k2 0 to t
dt, so which is nothing but integral c naught to c c power minus 2 dc. So here I am assuming
some of you are from science background as well. 
So I am going into detail so if you are from engineering background you have already taken the
course of the some chemical reaction engineering this would be simple. So this is nothing but 1
upon minus c. 1 upon minus c naught which is nothing but minus k2 t so this is nothing but
minus 2 plus 1 minus 2 plus 1, this will become a minus. So you would be having 1 upon c isnothing but 1 upon c is nothing but 1 upon c naught minus k2 t. So this is second order rate
constant so at particular time t so I will be able to tell what it is my concentration. 
So this is what here we have done for example, this is plus so this is 1 minus c goes there and
this 1 upon c so this will come here it must be plus. 1 upon c is nothing but 1 upon c naught plus
k2 t. So this is where here given at zeroth order reaction your c is nothing but c naught minus k
naught t. So we have derived here c equal to c naught minus k naught t and for first order
reaction so it is nothing but c equals to c naught e power minus k1 t and for second order reaction
it is nothing but 1 upon c, 1 upon c naught plus k2 t. So that is what we derived here.
So what are all the examples for zeroth order reaction. This is caramelization of sugar and
vitamin C destruction in meats. So these follow zeroth order reaction so most of the microbial
destruction  and enzyme inactivation.  So this  is  important  because we are going to discuss
extensively about this in this course. So for microbial destruction, so what are all the kinetic
expression, so these both follows first order reaction. 
So we would be talking extensively about c equal to c naught e power minus k1 t and second
order reaction it is nothing but 1 upon c 1 upon c naught plus k2 t. This is thiamin destruction in
milk. So when we will be talking about milk pasteurization. So this is important. And fractional
orders also would be possible. So we are not going to go in detail about that. So now what we
have done here is if I known my order of reaction a priori, so I will be able to calculate my
concentration at any point of time t but if I don’t know order of reaction a priori, so how would I
be calculating that.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:19)
The general expression what we have is minus dc upon dt which is nothing but kn c power n. So
what are we going to do is we are going to take log in both the side which is nothing but log kn
plus n log c. So now it becomes a form, y equal to mx plus c. So in the laboratory what I would
be doing is I will be taking at each minute so what is my concentration of the reacting species,
the concentration for example, molds per liter. So if I take a simple example of A gives B, A is
nothing but a reactant, B is nothing but a product. So I would be knowing mechanism from the
chemistry. 
So how would I be able to determine the concentration at various time. There may be a titration
technique for example, some reaction so from that I would be able to determine at particular time
what  is  the  concentration  remaining,  concentration  of  A is  remaining  in  the  reaction  or
sometimes what may so happen is how much of B is produced at particular time of reaction.
Since we have talked about the reacting species so I am saying like how much reactant is
depleted at particular time. 
So here I will be taking for zeroth so my concentration is c naught then at 1 minute my
concentration is c c1 and second minute my concentration is c2 This is the way I will record. And
what I would be requiring is my log of minus dc dt. So I would be needing I would be need of dcdt. So log of dc dt so first I should be determining what is dc dt, then after that I will be taking
log and also I would require log of c, log of c. So log of c is straight forward you will be doing it.
So dc dt how do you calculate? So what is a if I take what is dc, dc is nothing but c1 minus c
naught upon t1 minus t naught. So this also I can write t not equal to 0, t1 equal to 1 minute, t2
equal to 2 minute, so remember we are talking about how much reactant is getting depleted. So
when the reaction proceeds, the reactant will be consumed so c1 is nothing but low compared to
c naught so that is where this minus comes, so I will be writing like so minus of if I take minus
out, so then the c naught will be coming here.
So this is nothing but minus of c naught and plus c naught. So I will be having c naught minus c1
by t1 minus t naught. So one minus sign is here, so that is the way I will write minus dc dt. So if
I take a log, then I will have this value. So from taking just a log of concentration column then I
will be having log c. So now I am going to plot it. Plot it versus so m sorry it is not c it is mx. So
x is nothing but log c. So in x axis log c and in y axis it is log minus dc dt. So I will be having,
the linear line so which talks about the intercept.
So intercept is nothing but log kn so from this I will be able to calculate my rate constant at n th
order reaction. So why we are doing this? I do not know priory what is my order of reaction, so
this is nothing but f intercept. So this is what we call it as a c. So this slope is nothing but n
which is nothing but order of reaction. So we are familiar with now how to calculate the order of
reaction and how to calculate the rate constant at particular order. so this is what discussed here
principle behind determining kn and n.(Refer Slide Time: 16:03)
So whatever we discussed it is given in the slide, get you familiarize with the technique, or how
to determine kn as well as n which is nothing but a order of reaction when you do not know
really. So now we are slowly moving what is a analogy between what I learnt the kinetic
expressions and how I am going to use in thermal processing of food. So one such situation I
have already discussed is is sterilization where I would be employing temperature to kill the
microorganisms. So this killing of microorganisms can be done is many ways. For example, they
might be using bactericidal compound, or they may be using the physical reaction which is
nothing but temperature, pressure and sometimes it is a electric field. 
And the moment I talk about microorganism, it (inclu) it includes bacterias, yeasts as well as
viruses. As you all know if you know little bit of micro biology, these bacterias are nothing but a
prokaryotic,  and yeasts are nothing  but a eukaryotic  cells, and viruses  are nothing but the
parasites. So we collectively talk about, in terms of microorganisms and the actions would be
either it may be a bactericidal compound, or it may be a temperature or it may be a pressure or it
may be any electric field, right but since the course is concentrating on thermal processing most
of the time I will be talking about the physical action which is nothing but a temperature. (Refer Slide Time: 17:44)
So in general these are all the properties, these are all the factors which affect the growth of
microorganisms. So one is nothing but nutrient concentration, so here when I am talking about
these factors so what I meant is this should be in particular range, particular range in the sense so
till certain range it will be affecting the growth of microorganisms, but beyond certain range it
will be affecting the growth of microorganisms. 
So if you know the micro biology when you are preparing the culture medium, so you will be
including the nutrient at particular concentration for example, if particular component beyond
certain concentration that itself will be a inhibiter for the growth of microorganisms. So the
second  main  important  thing  is  nothing  but  a  temperature.  So  this  is  what  we  will  be
concentrating whole course, how I will be processing thermally processing the food  
So any metabolic reaction which happens in the cells are catalyzed by the enzymes. So what
happens if the temperature goes beyond certain level, these enzymes getting denatured. So when
enzymes getting (ne) denatured at high temperature, so they will not be able to catalyze any
metabolic reactions. That is how the death of microorganism starts. and pH, pH is also another
important parameter certain food require, certain pH or certain growth of microorganisms in it
certain pH. So this may be acidic pH, or alkalic neutral pH so that based on the microorganisms at which
range of pH the microorganisms grow and at which range of pH the inactivation starts. Another
important parameter is nothing but oxygen. So we already know there are three major categories,
aerobic which requires oxygen, anaerobic which does not and facultative anaerobic it survives in
both the condition whether oxygen is available or unavailable. 
The fifth parameter is nothing but a water activity. So this cells live in the determined range of
osmotic pressure. Each cells require certain osmotic pressure to be live or for the growth of
microorganisms  certain  osmotic  pressure  is  required  but  this  is  indirectly  related  to  water
activity. This is nothing but a vapor pressure of water to the saturation pressure of water at
particular temperature. Apart from that, there are lethal components or inhibitory components so
based  on  that  there  are  three  categories-  one  is  minimal  inhibitory  concentration  and
bacteriostatic and the MBC is nothing but minimal bactericidal concentration. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:32)
So if you go little bit, so growth of microorganisms, so normal growth curve is something like
this. So we call it as a cell concentration. So what time, so there is something called lag phase, so
it acclimatized to the environmental condition and there is a exponential growth. So this is
nothing but a exponential growth phase and this is nothing but a stationary phase. So this is
nothing but a death phase.So this is growth of microorganisms but we are not going into detail there should not be any
discontinuity. So here we are talking about inactivation. So I already told inactivation can be
done in many ways so for example, this is my cell concentration so this is over the time so if I
am applying some bactericidal compound so how does it behave, sometimes what happens is to
the bactericidal component, so they learnt how to survive with any bactericidal compound as
well as sometimes physical actions.
So this we call it as a bacteriostatic, so this we call it as a MIC this is so minimum inhibitory
concentration. So when I apply some bactericidal component so there is minimum concentration
is required to inactivate the microorganisms. So then after that the microorganisms the cell
concentration  starts  decreasing  so  this  we  call  it  as  a  MIB.  So  minimal  inhibitory, MBC
minimum bactericidal concentration. So this in general about the bactericidal component. But in
this course we are going to talk about what is the effect when I apply temperature as my
inhibitory compound.
It  is  not  inhibitory  compound.  I  am  using  temperature  as  a  physical  action  to  kill  the
microorganisms.  So  this  looks  like  when  I  time  versus  this  is  cell  concentration,  cell
concentration so this is nothing but temperature. So that is my physical action. So first it is
something like that. As I told temperature certain ranges required for the growth. Then after
certain temperature, it is starts decreasing. So this is what we are going to talk about as a
inactivation kinetics. But this is true for any of other physical action.
For example, if I am applying the electric field, so certain organisms know how to resist them,
how to resist certain electrical field and they starts still surviving. Certain organisms will get
killed upon particular physical action. So sometimes what happens is the death microorganisms
also acting as a shield and which protects  rest of the microorganisms  that is the way this
bacteriostatic phase happens. But anyway we are not going to go into detail about that.(Refer Slide Time: 24:41)
So now we learnt what is the inactivation kinetics. How it is going to happen in terms of
temperature. So we already told most of the inactivation kinetics of the microorganisms follows
first order reaction. So we will go little bit detail. So for example, here dN upon dt so there we
have talked about the concentration. Here N means cell population. So which is nothing but k, so
this rate constant I am putting as inc, so that it will be something different. So into k inc and N. N
is nothing but a population. So if you are getting so this is nothing but log of N naught upon N which is nothing but minus k
inc minus because this minus I have taken here so this is t. So what is this, this is nothing but y
equal to mx. So this is my t time. So this is log N naught upon sorry this is nothing but N upon N
naught . So when you are this remains same dN upon dt which is nothing but k in inc into N
which becomes dN upon N which is equal to minus k inc t so if I am N naught  to N so this
happens 0 to t so N upon N naught  minus k inc t. 
So now I am doing it time versus N upon N naught , so N naught  is, N is what the cell
population at that particular time. So N naught is nothing but initial cell population so I will get
because it is a the negative slope so then this slope is nothing but k k inc. So this is the way I will
relate here the N equal to N naught 10 to the power of minus t upon dt is nothing but here we
have taken in log 10 so one can define in this way also. So this k inc so how do I relate, this K
inc is related to some value called D value. So this we call it as decimal reduction time, so what
is called decimal reduction time that we will see.
So here if you see N equal to N naught 10 to the power of minus t upon DT because we have told
log of N upon N naught into k minus is equals to minus k dt so this is also equivalent to log N
upon N naught which is nothing but minus k inc t so this k inc I am writing as log 10 N upon N
naught which is nothing but minus t upon DT. So this T is nothing but a reference temperature
when we discuss in detail then we will get to know.
So this N naught is nothing but initial microbial count, CFU colony forming unit per ml. N is
nothing but final microbial count so I should be telling at particular time what is my final
microbial count and t is time which may be in seconds or minutes. So DT is nothing but decimal
reduction time which is also in terms of seconds or minutes. If you represent this as a minute and
this also minute and it goes like that.(Refer Slide Time: 29:06)
So we talked about already, so how do I relate my slope into decimal reduction time. So the D
value goes like this decimal reduction time. Time in minutes at a given temperature so that is
what I told T represents the at a given temperature that results in a 1 log reduction in a microbial
count, 1 order of magnitude. So now we will be seeing in this in detail here so for example, so
this is my time in seconds so this is my log of N upon N naught so this I have the slope. So what
is says about so instead of this I will be putting in numbers. So that you will understand it better,
so this is my 1.1 is nothing but my initial concentration N naught, so this is where it starts so that is 1. So then
this is 0.1, the next one is 0.01, the next one is 0.001, so then next one is 0.0001, so then next one
is 0.00001. So it says about 1 log reduction, 1 log reduction in the sense so 90 percentage of
microorganisms get killed. 1 log reduction remaining I will be having only 10 percentage of the
microorganisms. so if I have to put log of N upon N naught, So what did I say 90 percentage of
the microorganisms get killed at 1 log reduction. 
So this will be nothing but so log 10 so how much would be the initial concentration would be
having so only I will be having N by N naught by 10th. 1 by 10th of will be having. So or
otherwise 10 percentage of the microorganisms would be survived so that is nothing but 0.1 of N
naught. So this is N naught. So this will be nothing but log of 10 0.1 so this is minus 1 so we
have already told this is equivalent to so log of N upon N naught is nothing but minus k inc into
t. So this is minus 1 which is nothing but minus t upon D so minus minus so t equal to D.
So to get 1 log reduction, so 1 log reduction in the sense here, so what should be my value, so
this is nothing but my D value. So for example, I need to get it killed 99 percentage. Here I told
90 percentage if it is 99 percentage what you would be having is 1. So 1 is nothing but 0.01. So it
will be like minus 2 so this is nothing but t equal to 2D. So if I want to kill the 99.99 percentage
of the microorganism then what I would be having so here I will be having 0.01 percentage so
which is nothing but 0.0001 so which is nothing but minus 4. So your D would be 4 log
reduction, for 4 log reduction.
So how much is the time requirement, so that is way D value is getting calculated. So now I hope
you will be able to calculate and understand that D value. So this T represents at particular
temperature. So this is N is nothing but here I talked about in terms of what is it log scale. So
here it is represented as N so N is nothing but number of microorganisms so that is nothing but a
cell population and N naught is nothing but a initial concentration. So 10 to the power of minus 1
upon DT we already told that this is nothing but minus k inactivation which is nothing but a
decimal reduction time Dt. And this is something important, so what is organisms with high D
value or more resistant to heat and exhibit a flatter slope than organisms with lower D. 
So if you are able to see what I have drawn. So for example, if I have this flatter slope, so what I
would be having for 1 log reduction so maybe I will put something like till here. So if I extend it,so what happens so instead of this I will be having for 1 log reduction itself, so this D value so
that means what at particular temperature if my D value is high those organisms are bit heat
resistant. So if I will be able to survive at that particular temperature more long time so that
means  I am able  to  resist that  particular  amount  of heat  which  is  given  at  that  particular
temperature. So that is why you get flatter slope.
(Refer Slide Time: 34:47)
Here I will be explaining you. So which organisms is more heat resistant. So here if you see your
slope is nothing but minus 1 upon D1so here if you calculate for example, your slope so any
particular value if you calculate your slope so for particular Dy you will get more Dx. So the
slope of minus 1 upon D1 is higher slope. In terms of slope this is higher when compared to 1
upon D2 so thus, D1 is less than D2. So that means what the microorganisms having D value of
D2 is more resistant, more heat resistant. What is D2 values, so this one is more heat resistant
that is why you get maximum D value. (Refer Slide Time: 35:43)
So another one important concept here is the z value. The z value is nothing but temperature
change required for a 1 log change in the D value of an any organism. So for example, here what
we talk about is earlier if you see the equation is nothing but 10 to the power of minus t upon DT,
this T I told at reference temperature or reference temperature you can take. 
For example, if I get at D1 I am getting at particular temperature T1, if I get D2 at particular
temperature T2., so here I have put T1 as a reference temperature and T2 was normal T. So what
I would be having, I would be having log 10 D1 minus D2 is nothing but T1 minus T2 upon z.
So this z value is nothing but a slope. This is nothing but minus 1 upon z. So this is D value at
seconds or I will be putting something like this.
So if I have a temperature T1 if I have a temperature T2. So this is my, this thing so this is my D
value so for T1 I will be having D1 value at T2 I will be having D2. So this is nothing but my z
value. 1 log reduction from D1 to D2 it is a 1 log reduction. So what is a temperature range it
will be having. The same what we discussed already the organisms with high z value are more
resistant and exhibit a flatter slope. So if you compare both of the concepts, so it is a different
temperature what would be my D value and from that how I am calculating the slope. (Refer Slide Time: 37:43)
So maybe I will explain, so this is the conclusive remarks on D and z values. The equation is N
equal to N naught 10 to the power of minus 1 upon DT. So this DT is nothing but decimal
reduction time. The z value is I will be calculating at particular temperature particular D value.
So when I plot it temperature versus D value. So if you remember bit of your chemical reaction
engineering so any kinetic expression for example, we discussed when we start the class minus
dc upon dt is nothing but kcA, kn power cn. So this k is nothing but a rate constant which is again the function of temperature e upon RT. So
this z value is more related to the kinetic expressions. Kinetic expressions in the sense so here it
is also referred to kinetic expressions but here how my microorganism is getting deactivated at
particular  temperature  with  time.  So  it  talks  about  how  long  does  it  require  at  particular
temperature to kill microorganisms from initial count to final count. So here it talks about more
of temperature dependency. It is related to the kinetic model which is nothing but we call it as a
Arrhenius model.
So this is nothing but (each) each temperature what is my D value so I will plot it so this also
follow linear expression. The slope is nothing but minus 1 upon z. So now I will be just giving
one example. For example, any D value so for particular microorganism, so it takes D values of
30 minute at say 40 degree so and it takes 1 log reduction. 1 log reduction is nothing but
something 90 percentage. So I will be putting 3 minute then at 50 degree centigrade. So what is
my z value? I already told 1 log reduction in D value.
So this is nothing but a 10 degree centigrade. So it is not only about the microorganisms.
Sometimes I need to do trade off, trade off in the sense the initial of the when we start the lecture
itself I have told you that c talks about not only the microbial count its sometimes talk about
enzyme activities, sometimes talks about nutrient content everything. So if I say some of my
food components, some my food products, have the similar D values for example, it has some 25
minute at 40 degree so it has some 20 minute at 50 degree.
So how this things look like? For example,  if I have microorganisms  this thing so this is
something at when I will get greater slope so this is at 55. Based on my experience what we
discussed earlier so this will happen at 40, when I increase the temperature the inactivation
would be faster. So if I take 1 log reduction 0.1 so what happens is sorry this is 50 degree. 1 log
reduction is something 0.1 so if I sorry so I have D value so this is nothing but I am talking about
D value. So this may be a cell count as well as some food component. Food component in the
sense what I meant here is may be some nutrient content, some vitamin or something.
If I have this extended here so that is nothing but a 30 minute. That is what I have mentioned
here. So this is nothing but 3 minute. If I fix something like 6 log reduction, 6 log reduction in
the sense my micro biologist says “for that particular food processing I would require 6 logreduction of any microorganism.” So how does it does that if it is 30 minute so it becomes 180
minute. So then if it is 3 minute so this becomes 18 minute. So it require 180 minute to process at
40 degree, and 18 minute to process at 50 degree. So similarly so this is nothing but for any food
components or maybe you can put food nutrient instead of saying component. 
So this is food nutrient so this D value is 25 minute so if I get 180 upon 25, so this is something
about 7.2 log 10. So if I have 18 upon 20 so this becomes around 0.9 log 10. so this is at 40
degree, so this is at 50 degree. So if you understand the things clearly, ao I would require 18
minute which is less time at 50 degree centigrade. So also I am getting 0.9 log reduction only in
terms of food nutrient because my aim is to kill the micro organism not to reduce any food
nutrient. 
So in that case I will be choosing my 50 degree centigrade as a higher temperature as my target.
So that I will get minimum reduction in the food nutrient and maximum reduction because it is
not maximum reduction because I have fixed my microorganism reduction as a 6 log reduction.
So 6 log reduction I would be requiring only 18 minute at 50 degree. So I am also getting less
log reduction in the food nutrient. So this is the way I do the trade of using D value and z value.
So it is extensively used in designing the sterilization process. 
(Refer Slide Time: 44:41)
So here it is given for various microorganisms for example, if this is mainly important in the
milk sterilization C. botulinum, type A and B so which requires D of 0.1 to 0.2 minutes at 250
degree Fahrenheit and which which is having a z values of 14 to 18. So these are all listed out
different microorganisms and their D and z values.
(Refer Slide Time: 45:13)
And quality attributes are given for various enzymes as well. So peroxide from black radish,
peroxidase from green beans, and catalase from spinach and thiamin in carrot puree which is at
pH 5.9 so what should be the if I give 121 which is nothing but the sterilization temperature, the
D value is about 158, so z value is nothing but 25. So this is the way I combined D and Z values
and get my quality attributes for the particular thermal processing. (Refer Slide Time: 45:48)
So and also here when we talk about the kinetic expressions I have already told there were few
factors affecting the growth of microorganisms. So based on these factors affecting there were
many models for example, temperature and pH only if they talk about they call it as a secondary
model. And when they talk about activity also they call it as a tertiary model. There were many
models available but still we have taken here the Arrhenius model. Arrhenius model and my
microorganism inactivation is following the first order reaction. So here I talk about the growthphase as well. So when I am talking about the inactivation, what I told is it is following linear
line, so that does not happen in sometime.
Sometimes the inactivation happens something of this kind so there is something like stationary
phase and there is something like decrease phase. Then we call it as this as shoulder. And this is
actual inactivation. And sometimes here this becomes a tail. The shoulder is nothing but if the
organism is heat resistant it will not immediately decrease. So you will not get immediate
reduction in the number of viable cells. 
So there will be constant period which will be called as shoulder that after that inactivation
happens. It may not be a linear and there is a tail. Tail in the sense here microorganism learnt
how to resist the heat. So these are all also possible but what we have discussed in this course is
only about the linear inactivation of microorganisms. 
So that one should keep in mind and there are many model based on your process and based on
your microorganism and based on your food component, you will be able to choose which is
your best model to be studied or which is the best model from the experiments one will be able
to tell which model microorganisms inactivation is following. So these are all tables this you will
get in the references itself. 
(Refer Slide Time: 48:02)
So what we have discussed today is one is most of reactions can be described by minus dc upon
dt which is equivalent to kn c power n. So this we call as kinetic expression or where e kn is
nothing but a rate constant which follows Arrhenius model which is nothing but k naught e
power minus e by rt that is where my temperature is comes into play. We call it as a thermal
processing of food or in sterilization process I am killing microorganisms by using physical
action which is nothing but a temperature. And also we have studied kinetics  of microbial
destruction and enzyme (in in) inactivation and quality changes.
Quality changes in the sense for example, we were able to compare D and z value for one
particular process which has microorganisms to deactivate at the same time my food nutrient
should not get deactivate more or my enzyme activity should not be reduced more and for that
which is the temperature I should choose, one example we have seen. And this can be described
by D z model or Arrhenius model. So the Arrhenius model is nothing but what I told. So your z
value is function of temperature which is following minus e upon rt. So we will be doing some of
the problems based on whatever we learnt today so that we would be seeing probably in next few
classes.
(Refer Slide Time: 49:26)
So  this  is  references  and  additional  resources  which  you  would  like  to  refer  for  further
clarifications. Thank you.