Thermal Processing of Foods
Professor R. Anandalakshmi
Department of Chemical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Lecture 09 - Quality Considerations and Process Optimization
Good afternoon all. Today in continuation to yesterday's lecture, so we are going to see today
quality considerations and process optimization in thermal processing of food. So the outline
goes like this:
(Refer Slide Time: 00:48)
The  optimization  of  thermal  processes  with  respect  to  quality  and  the  heat  transfer
considerations in thermal processing and also if time permits we would like to see some of
the examples, how to really optimize the thermal process.(Refer Slide Time: 1:02)
So the optimization of thermal processes talks about the processing conditions for which the
preservation with the minimal damage to the organoleptic as well as the nutritional quality.
So normally thermal processing can be done for either one of the reason, one for maybe for
sterilization or some foods it is for pasteurization. So when you do that the main aim was to
inactivate the microorganisms, they may be spoilage organisms, so which may be killed or
controlled and one more is the disease causing microorganisms, which are pathogens. To kill
them also we do thermal processing.
Along with that there is a nutritional quality damage also, so we suppose to design a thermal
process which will not damage more nutritional quality as well as it also has to kill the
required level of microorganisms. So the optimization is something like minimal damage to
this one and the required killing or controlling of microorganisms.
So along with this process there were few other process are also accompanied. The first one is
inactivation of enzymes. So this is with respect to microorganisms. This is decided for long-
term  storage.  Because  the  moment  you  increase  the  temperature  the  enzymes  gets
deactivated, due to that some of the metabolic reactions within the microorganisms gets
damaged. So because of that also microorganisms gets killed.
So the enzymes which are required for metabolic reactions of microorganisms, if they get
killed, if they get inactivated, then it is a desirable for long-term storing. Another one is along
with this the cooking also happens. So that means the product changes in texture, flavor,color and appearance. So, this is decided certain range of temperature, but beyond certain
range it is not favorable. For example, the food should be appealing, so if it is get fried too
much, then we will not be liking it.
So there is a certain range of temperature, certain range of temperature, so this is actually a
favorable but beyond certain range it is a problem. Another one is destruction of nutritionally
significant components such as heat sensitive vitamins. So this also gets inactivated not only
the enzymes which are favorable for microorganism metabolic reactions, but heat-sensitive
vitamins, which are useful for us also gets denature.
So that is unwanted thing and sometimes what happens is some undesirable components. The
example is acrylamide. So which also gets, maybe say it as a side reactions. So these kind of
components also produced during thermal processing. So we need to take care all of them
together when you design any thermal process.
(Refer Slide Time: 4:30)
So we have already seen some of the examples as well as we discussed a lot about the z
value. So if you remember the kinetic expression classes, we have also compared two cases,
the vitamin destruction as well as the microorganism inactivation. So in that if you remember
the z value for any ordinary chemical reaction is normally larger than the thermal death of the
microorganisms. So for that case the concept of high temperature short time is introduced. So
for an equal, F  naught, F naught,  also we have already discussed in the class. So, the
processing at high temperature for a short time, so since my z value is higher for most of thechemical reactions, so I would like to go for higher temperature for a shorter time, so instead
of lower temperature for higher time.
So, which results lesser thermal damage to the quality of the food as well as the quality of the
vitamins or nutritional components. So this concept is introduced based on the z value which
are  higher  than  for  most  of  the  chemical  reactions  compared  to  thermal  death  of
microorganisms. And one more thing is, here what we need to be a bit careful about is, the
temperature what you choose, the high temperature. So that is within the favorable range of
the particular nutritional quality. The higher temperature what I choose itself a denature the
enzyme, then there is no point in going for that particular temperature.
So the temperature also should be optimized as a high temperature in which there should not
be any denature of the enzyme. So z value for enzyme inactivation is also higher than the
sterilization. So this we have already seen, so we have already discussed for an equal F
naught value enzyme deactivation will be less extensive at HT, HT means higher temperature
at  which  the  residual  enzyme  activity  of  the  product  will  not  endanger  the  long  range
stability. This is what I told, so I have to choose high temperature in such a way that it should
not endanger the long range stability of the product.
(Refer Slide Time: 6:46)
And also what happens at HTST?(Refer Slide Time: 6:49)
We have seen four qualities, one is inactivation of enzyme. So this also to be considered
when you choose the high temperature.
(Refer Slide Time: 6:58)
The next point is cooking. So if cooking is one of the objective of the thermal processing, so
then HTST process is less desirable. So what happens for example, so I have a can, so inside
my food product is there. So, my one of the aim is cooking the product also, so that means
what happens? So, it has to, the heat has to pass through the packing material and also it has
to pass through the food particle or food product.
So what happens, normally the coldest point of the food, so that will be based on the
geometric shape. So mostly it happens to be at the center. For example, this is the particle. So
this is the way heat conducts through if it is a solid product. So this is the coldest point, so the
remaining places the temperature would be higher than the coldest point. So what happens, so
certain places your food is overcooked, certain places it is undercooked. So this kind of
temperature gradient would occur.
So if cooking is one of the objectives then the going for HTST is less desirable because at
that high temperature one part of food is overcooked other part of food is not cooked, not
cooked in the sense it is either at the desired temperature or maybe at lower than the desired
temperature.
So then the F naught at the coldest point is taken into account while I am deciding the time,
the F naught is nothing but a time, so if I decide the time, then I will be taking into account
the my coldest point of the product also reaches the my target temperature. So in that case the
remaining portion would be over-processed. Another one is the formation of the undesirable
components, this also get enhanced at higher temperature. So even though when you choosethe HTST, that is nothing but high temperature short time process, so you need to be taking
into account all these things, how to take care of the overcooking product.
And one more thing is the high temperature should be chosen based on the denaturing of the
enzyme and we have to take care about the any undesirable component which gets produced
at that particular temperature as well.
(Refer Slide Time: 9:04)
So this example talks about the liquid food is processed at constant temperature 110 degree
for 30 second. So the process results in 25 percentage of the vitamin present in the food, so it
is decided to change the constant temperature, constant temperature in the sense this they are
going to change, so that the same destruction of microorganisms achieved. So the both the
process, one is T 1 is 110 degree and the small t 1 this is nothing but 30 second. So this
results 25 percentage of the vitamin destruction. But I do not know what is my T2 and I also
do not know what is my small t 2 which gets 10 percentage vitamin loss.
In both the process I took the same level of death of microorganisms. So now calculate the
new temperature. This side we have to calculate and the new processing time. So z value of
the microorganism is given, z equal to 10 and Q 10 value is also given which is 2. So this
Q10, is it F naught, F everything you would be familiar. I hope so, because we have discussed
extensively in last classes.So the first one is, F naught, so this is nothing but T 1 into 10 to the power of T 1 minus T
reference upon z. So, if I want to compare the same F naught value, so that is what they
supposed to tell the same destruction of microorganisms 10 T 2 minus T reference upon z, so
which would give me T 1 upon T 2 which is nothing but T 2. Because, this will come as
minus T 1 upon z, so T 1 I know 30 upon T 2 which is nothing but 10 to the power of T 2
minus this also I know 110 divided by 10. So this I got it. So this is this I did it based on F
naught value. So now another thing is also given.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:53)
So, my log reduction is given, log of C upon C naught. Because it is a destruction of enzyme,
so that is nothing but K 1 T 1 so I will put it the first thing, so another one is log of C upon C
naught. So, at second case minus K 2 upon T 2. So, if you take it this one K 2 T 2 upon K 1 T1 is nothing but log of C upon C not which is nothing but log of what we told is 25
percentage destruction. And another one what they have given is 10 percentage. So remaining
would be 75 percentage. So here remaining would be 90 percentage.
So in the second case we have 0.9, so divided by log of C upon C naught. So in the second
case it will be log of 0.75, so which gives me K 2 upon K 1 which is nothing but 30 into log
of 0.9 divided by T 2 log of 0.75, so which is equivalent to 2 into T 2 minus 110 divided by is
what is 10. So this you do the calculation. So what I have done already, so what we got is K 1
K 2, so this is there. So it is something like 11 upon T 2 which is equivalent to 2 into T 2
minus 110 upon 10. So I have my second equation here. And this is my first equation.
So compare both and we got around 117 degree centigrade and T 2 is 5.9 second. So this is
the way I need to fix the temperature. So what it was asked this so instead of 25 percentage
loss of vitamin, so I will get 10 percentage loss of vitamin, instead of if it is processing at 110
degree  at  30  second,  so  now  we  are  processing  at  117  degree  at  5.9  second.  So  the
temperature is increased here 7 degree, but almost six times reduction in your time, so earlier
it was processed at 30 second. So now it is going to be processed at 5.9 second almost 6
seconds, so I should say five times reduction. So this would give me 25 percentage loss of
vitamin to 10 percentage loss of vitamin but both the cases my thermal death of organism is
same. Let us see. So this is the way I optimize the process.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:18)
So now the second one is the heat transfer consideration. So when I take when I sterilize what
are all the heat transfer considerations, so I need to take. So normally sterilization of solid
food in a retort at 120 degree may be larger than the time required for desired thermal death
of the target microorganism. So normally what we say is okay. So this particular temperature
you need to process at particular time. For example, last example, we have seen if it is 117
degrees if we are maintaining so it should be processed at six years for the desired thermal
death. So normally what happens is we already discussed about. So it is the temperature of
the coldest point of the food, so that should reach at 120 so that my target of thermal
processing would be complete.
So more than the thermal death of target organism the time required is chosen based on the
heat  transfer considerations  of the food product. For example,  so if it has less  thermal
conductivity, if it is a solid food, if it has less thermal conductivity, it will take longer time for
the temperature to reach the coldest point. So based on this slowest process, normally we
know any kinetic process consideration has to be decided based on the slowest step. So the
slowest step here is nothing but the heat penetration to the coldest point of the can. So this
thermal death of microorganism can happen in 2 seconds or 3 seconds or 4 seconds, but this
heat penetration takes almost one hour. So the process is designed for 1 hour, than 3 minute
which causes the death of target microorganism. So, rate of heat transfer process rather than
the thermal resistance of the microorganism often determines the duration of the process. So,
this is the slowest step. So based on this only I will decide my duration of the process.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:21)
So if that is the case, so what are all the thermal resistance involved in packaging thermal
processing? The first one is for example, I have a retort. So in this retort, my product is kept
so here I have in the wall I have the spray nozzles for the heating medium to be in. The first
thing is heat transfer from the heating medium to the package surface. So the steam to
package  surface  that  is  one  kind  of  heat  transfer. Another  is  heat  transfer  through  the
packaging material, packaging material in the sense the pack. So first one is, this is heat
transfer medium HRM sorry HTM, heat transfer medium to the packaging and packaging to
the food. So this is your food.
So 3 kind of, one is, another is internal heat transfer from the inner surface of the package to
the coldest point of the product. So you might be familiar with this procedure because if the
counter is you take any heat exchanger double pipe heat exchanger, so what happens is this is
my for example hot fluid. This is cold fluid. So this hot fluid should pass through the wall of
the cold fluid, then the heat transfer happens. The same thing here, from the heat transfer
medium to package, package to food, so internal heat transfer, heat transfer through the
packaging and heat transfer from the heating medium to the packaging.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:01)
So what are all the heating medium, famous heating medium used is the most famous is
saturated steam. So because of the following reasons, one is heat transfer coefficient of the
condensing vapor film is high. So that means what happens, so when the heating medium is
given into the retort, so after some time, so the condensing vapor forms the film near the
packaging.If the heat transfer coefficient of the particular film is low, then that will also add up extra
resistance in for the heat transfer. So this is very high. So we will not be having any issue. So
that is the one reason. Another is the temperature of the saturated stream controlled through
its pressure. So the pressure and temperature relation is well and good in saturated steam. So
that is another reason and one more is heat of evaporation is high, so for particular mass of
the steam the heat content carried away by the steam is high. So, that is nothing but a heat of
evaporation.  So  that  is  also  high  and  pressure  of  this  steam  outside  of  the  packaging
counteracts the pressure. This is very much important because otherwise the rupture of the
packaging occurs.
So most of the food contains the water inside, so the pressure developed inside and outside
the packaging will counterbalance and there will not be any rupture of the packaging. So for
these reasons steam is, saturated steam is favorable, but also there is a disadvantage.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:28)
So as I told earlier it is not only the heat transfer medium which transfers heat efficiently, but
it also has  to pass  through the packaging.  So if you have a packaging of low thermal
conductivity material, for example glass, so the glass the thermal conductivity varies between
0.4 to 1 watt per meter Kelvin. So in such case what happens is there will be thermal gradient
in the packaging material.(Refer Slide Time: 20:56)
So this thermal gradient causes the thermal stresses, but you are outside your steam will be of
high  pressure.  So  this  thermal  stress  is  also  there  which  is  developed  for  low  thermal
conductivity material. So this is this makes unfavorable situation.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:12)
So we have a certain advantages of these kind but also one needs to take care the packaging
material, whether it is a low thermal conductivity or high thermal conductivity. So that is one
issue with the saturated steam.(Refer Slide Time: 21:25)
And hot water is also another heating medium. So compared to saturated steam this is less
efficient and where it is favorable means so this is what I told low thermal conductivity
material, it is nothing but the glass. So the K when there is a thermal gradient developed in
the glass which is nothing but a low thermal conductivity material the hot water is outside. So
you will not have much thermal gradient between the heat transfer medium and the packaging
material. So in such cases hot water is a favorable one and good circulation is essential.
So if good circulation of hot water is not there then we will develop cold points in heat
transfer  medium  as  well.  So  to  avoid  that  good  circulation  is  also  essential  and air  to
counterbalance over pressure and some agitation. So sometimes what happens along with the
hot water they send air also to counterbalance the overpressure and sometimes agitation is
also needed to enhance the heat transfer.
So there is something called cascade retorts. The cascade retorts are nothing but so you have
a retort. So what happens is here I have a perforated plates, hot water is sent through this then
bottom I will take it up and put a heat exchanger then heat it up again, then it is circulated. So
this is nothing but a cascade retorts to avoid any temperature gradient in the hot water itself,
the temperature gradient in the sense to keep it uniform particular temperature. So this kind of
design also tried and spray retorts are nothing but you have sprays in the wall of the retort, so
through which your steam is being fed inside the retort.So this is mostly happens in the flexible packages. So flexible packages, we use spray retorts
and if it is a hot water we use cascade retorts the bottom we collect the hot water and again
heat it and give it to top and hot water is used as a heating medium, especially when low
thermal conductivity materials are tried as a packaging material.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:40)
And other heating mediums are steam and air mixture. This is also fairly common heating
medium and this efficiency is comparable to the tough water because steam alone having
good efficiency, but sometimes it is unfavorable. Hot water is sometimes it is favorable,
sometimes it is not favorable. So the steam and air mixture will give comparable efficiency of
water and the hot gas also one of the heating medium, but what happens is this due to high
temperature there may be a radiation heat transfer.
Mostly happens by radiation, so I do not think so this is that popular, that is also one of the
heating  medium  and  another  the  developing  technology  is  microwave  heating.  So  the
moment  you  go  for  microwave  heating  the  problem  is  capital  and  operation  costs  of
microwave system. And also you cannot use for normal packaging material because the metal
containers cannot be used that is where most of the canning process is done using metal
containers. So that is one of the issue and also one of the problem is if you go for sterilization
temperature,  which  is  normally  121  degree  Centigrade,  then  maintaining  the  external
pressurization would be a problem in microwave heating.
So for these reasons microwave heating  is not picked up that well, but there are some
acidified  vegetables  and  short  storage ready  to eat  meals.  This  is  less  than 100 degreeCentigrade. The pasteurization was already done using microwave heating. So these are all
some light about the heating medium.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:20)
First, heat transfer from heating medium to package. The second is packaging material.  The
packaging material we have already told, the thermal conductivity should be good, so for that
mostly aluminum tins or tinplate  is used as a packaging material  because their thermal
conductivity is good but glass is also used but the thermal conductivity is relatively low. So
when  you  use  glass  packaging  then  you need  to  choose  heating  medium  based  on  the
packaging material. If you choose low thermal conductivity, then heating medium should be
of water or steam air mixture. So if we are using high thermal conductivity material then
saturated steam can be tried.
And most of the time this heat transfer is negligible due to the reason small thickness. The
thickness of the wall is so minimum, so there will not be any appreciable heat transfer
resistance. So normally it is negligible.(Refer Slide Time: 26:13)
And internal heat transfer. So, internal heat transfer happens in two ways. One is conduction,
another is convection, sometimes both happens. If you have a liquid food and having solid
food particles, then through liquid it happens to be a convection, then in the solid particle in
the solid food particle it will be a conduction. So this is something of I already told it the
coldest point of the food. If it is in geometric center of the packaging in the conduction heat
transfer, conduction, if you have a solid food, so then the center of the food particle is nothing
but a coldest point. So if you have a vertical can which has a liquid food then one-third height
from the bottom is to be regarded as a coldest point. Point in convection.
And center of solid particles for large particles  in a low (viscous), low viscosity liquid
medium is nothing but so your viscosity will not add any extra resistance because viscosity is
nothing but a flow resistance. So if you have flow resistance, and if you are using heating so
it will reduce your viscosity bit but it will add up to resistance. So if it is a low viscosity
liquid medium, which has large solid particles, it is mostly taken as a conduction. So it is
nothing but then coldest point will be in the center of the solid particles.(Refer Slide Time: 27:42)
The next one is the agitation. So we have already mentioned somewhere how the heat transfer
can be increased. One is the some agitation, some agitation purpose. So how the heat transfer
is increased internally? Internally in the sense of when transfers from package inner wall to
the food particle or the food, which is there in the container. So one is End-over-end method,
another one is spin, another one is resonant acoustic mixing. The end-to-end method is
nothing but I have a container which has a food. What I will do is I will agitate like this. So
when you do, what happens, so this liquid go to top, then it comes here.
So when the headspace tends to rise and agitates the contents if the speed of rotation is too
fast no agitation occurs. So if I do like this very very fast, so then it becomes stagnant, there
will not be any agitation. So the optimal speed, you know, one is size of the container, if it is
a small container then your agitation would be different compared to large because the time it
takes to come here and go back will be different.
So the optimal speed how do you decide is based on your size as well as the viscosity of the
content inside the packaging. Spin method is nothing but this you might have seen, so just I
will rotate based on the axis. So when you rotate your router axis will have some velocity and
inside food particle  will have some other velocity. So based on velocity  gradient, your
agitation happens and resonant acoustic mixing is nothing but we have already seen this is
my retort, so here I have my crates.So this go to and fro like this. So this is the way the agitation happens and there is a vertical
agitation as well. But that is picking up recently. So these are all various agitation method to
increase the internal heat transfer tried in the retort.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:53)
And the important topic of this lecture is this heat penetration curve. So any I would require
my time temperature data for the product container system that can be used to design a
thermal sterilization process. So what we have seen now, so this is my packaging. So my heat
transfer medium is there, so from this heat has to conduct or convect to the packaging
material, from the packaging material it would reach the coldest point.
So unless I know how this time versus temperature curve is there unless I know time versus
temperature data, I will not be able to design efficient sterilization process. So for that thing I
need this particular heat penetration curve. So when the temperature of the every particle of
the food tends to toward the temperature of the heating medium, the heating medium we call
it here as or TR. So when I give TR to heat the food products, so every food product initially
at a temperature T naught so it tends to come to TR.
So I will when I plot this  time  versus  log of TR  minus  t, so that is  nothing but heat
penetration curve. This penetration depends upon many reason, if it is a liquid viscosity is
one of the parameter, if it is a solid food thermal diffusivity so that we will discuss anyway in
the next subsequent classes. In case of containers process retort, TR is the retort temperature.
So actually if it is a retort, it is in the retort what we told is first steam is on, so the steam iffor example it is at 120 degree Centigrade, so it will take some time, the retort will take some
time to reach to its steam temperature.
So that is nothing but 120 degree Centigrade. So this is to reach operating temperature it
takes some time. The time required for the unit to reach specified operating temperature from
steam is on is called come up period. So when I will switch on the steam, so for example, my
process operating temperature is 121 degree Centigrade, so this will take some time, my
retort will take some time to reach this up to particular temperature. So this is nothing but
come up period we call it as CUT.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:14)
So this is the heating curve as well as cooling curve. So what happens, I will keep my crates
and in the retort then I will switch on the steam. So it will take some time to reach the
particular sterilization temperature. So that is nothing but come up period then after it reaches
the sterilization temperature required temperature, it will be kept at a particular time period.
Then the cooling starts, starts in the sense it should come to environmental temperature.
So cooling curve as well as heating curve. So, this way my curve looks like. So this is heating
time, which is in minutes versus log of temperature difference. TR minus t, so TR is nothing
but here retort temperature. So this T is temperature of the food at any time. So there are
certain things we need to understand but here the heating starts at zero, but we already told so
it takes particular come up time. So here what I do is I will just extend this as a linear line so
and it touches the y-axis at this point. So this we call it as a log of T r minus T pih. So theremember here we have certain abbreviations T pih, T ih. T r, I have already told there is
something called J ch. Another is f h.
(Refer Slide Time: 33:41)
So here it is. First one is come up period, I have already told in batch processing operation the
retort require some time for reaching the operating condition. So that is nothing but the time
from steam to when the retort reached T r is called come up time, this we have already seen.
T ih is nothing but initial food temperature when heating is started.
(Refer Slide Time: 34:05)
So initial food temperature when heating is started, since we have told here the temperature
difference, so here it is log of T r minus T ih, and food temperature when cooling is started.
So this is comparable diagram, heating as well as cooling. So here it is T ic, so T w here is
cooling water temperature.
Initial temperature as T naught, initially food is at initial temperature and pseudo initial
temperature during heating. So that is what I told here, the we have to see what is T pih,
pseudo initial temperature during heating. So this is nothing but temperature indicated by the
intersection of extension of the heating curve and the vertical line representing effective
beginning of the process.
So this is my linear curve when it cuts the y-axis, so that is nothing but T pih. So since we
have told the difference, temperature difference between T r minus t so this is because this is
nothing but log of T r minus T pih. And the similar is nothing but pseudo initial temperature
during cooling, so that is nothing but here, so I will extend my cooling curve linear cooling
curve to the point where it cuts the y-axis. So that is nothing but T pic minus T w.
And normally we used to take, so this we discuss a bit while doing problems. So normally
what happens is we take point 0.58 of l. So this is nothing but CUT. So this we will discuss
with some example. So as of now it is nothing but 0.58 of come up period. The next one is
pseudo initial temperature during cooling, this we have already seen.(Refer Slide Time: 36:15)
So after that there is something called heating rate index. So here it is heating rate index. So
heating rate index is nothing but the time required for the straight line portion of the heating
curve, straight line portion of the heating curve to pass through one log cycle. One log cycle
in the sense if you see here so this is 1, so 1 when it cuts the linear heating curve, so that is
the time and 1 so this means 2, 2  when it cuts the linear line, so this is, so this time is nothing
but f h, so that is here heating rate index.
Straight line portion of the heating curve to pass through one log cycle, so that is the time
required. Sometimes it is called negative reciprocal of the slope of the heating curve. So this
is already 1, 1 upon this is nothing but f h. So f h is reciprocal of the slope. And another is i c
difference between the cooling water temperature and food temperature at the start of theprocess. Anyway, we have seen what is P ic, what is P ih. So this is nothing but difference
between the retort temperature and the start of the heating or cooling process. And J cc. So
one more thing is here we have is J ch and J cc, cooling and heating.
So  heating  rate  log factor  and cooling  rate  log  factor. So  this  is  a  factor  which  when
multiplied by ih the intersection of the extension of straight line portion of the semi-log
heating curve and the vertical line representing effective beginning of the process. So, what
would we say?
So this is nothing but log of T r minus T pih this point. So this point is nothing but log T r
minus T ih this is initial, when initial heating starts. So, this we call it as ih. ih is initial
heating period, this heating rate lag factor J ch is multiplied with ih which is nothing but
difference between the retort temperature and initial heating temperature. This would give me
T r minus T pih. T r minus T pih is nothing but my pseudo initial temperature during heating.
And cooling rate lag factor is almost a similar which is applicable for the cooling. So these
are all the things you get to know. So this is the initial temperature. So what I get curve of this
kind so then I will make it to linear curve. So where it cuts the y-axis that is nothing but log T
r minus t, so this is nothing but log T r minus T pih, p is here pseudo. ih is nothing but T r
minus T ih, f h is nothing but when one log reduction happens in the log of T r minus t then
that time is nothing but f h. J ch when multiplied by ih that gives me T r minus T pih.
The similar represented for cooling curve as well. After the sterilization period the cooling
starts. So this we will keep it at a particular time. So then the cooling starts here my cooling
water is employed. So then your product gets to normal temperature, what do you choose to
be. But this is ideal curve ideal heat penetration curve.(Refer Slide Time: 39:23)
But when you go for normal, so the heat penetration curve differs from the theoretical log
linear. So this is what we have done is log linear, semi log plot. So, this becomes a linear
curve. So, normal curve will not follow the log linear model. So what were the reasons? One
is  change  in  properties;  viscosity, thermal  conductivity  of  the  material,  another  one  is
mechanism of heat transfer. Whether sometimes what happens, this we told one example. In
the packaging, I have a liquid medium in that I have a food chunks. So here it happens to be a
convection, from the inside package material heat has to transfer via convection. Then when
it sees the solid food particle, it becomes a conduction.
So this convection to conduction transition, so I will not be having any information for time
temperature  data  and  another  one  is  changes  in  properties,  so  the  viscosity,  thermalconductivity which also determines. So there may be a deviation from the log linear plot and
in such cases the time temperature relationship is sometimes approximated by a broken line.
For example, I have something of this kind. So this till here I will have information, from
here I will have information. So this I will put it as approximate, so this is the way it should
be. So based on this sudden change of slope, that is the broken line is based on the sudden
change of the slope f h.
(Refer Slide Time: 40:52)
So the next one is in-flow thermal processing, inflow thermal processing in the sense here,
we told whatever we talked about in the inside the retort that is nothing but a batch process
but this can also be done in a inflow thermal processing. Inflow thermal processing means I
already told, one example would be the heat exchanger where you are heating medium is here
and your food is flowing inside the pipe. So, the heating medium to the wall and here to the
food. So this also time temperature relationship is log linear.(Refer Slide Time: 41:27)
For example, m dot Cp dT upon t is nothing but U, so this is nothing but heat what you have
given Q is equal to U A dT, M cp del T is nothing but h a del T which is U a del T, so this is
watt per second, so this is also watt per meter squared Kelvin, meter squared second Kelvin.
So this is the way and we already know d A upon dt is nothing but 4m dot upon D Rho. So if
you substitute m dot C p dT upon dt, so this del T I will take it as U for m dot d Rho,  so this
del t I will take it is T r minus t. So, m dot m dot goes there. So dT upon T r minus t is
nothing but 4 U D Rho C p into 0 to t, so this becomes T naught to T.
So you will have ln T r minus T upon T naught minus T which is nothing but 4U D rho C p
into t. So this is nothing but constant properties. This is heat transfer coefficient diameter and
density and specific heat. So this is time. So this is also even if it is a constant flow process,
so this becomes linear log relationship only, so this is T r minus T naught. So this is T is
nothing but average temperature.(Refer Slide Time: 43:37)
So this is also follows log linear relationship, but actual temperature what happens is degree
of turbulence, whether any turbulence is there and physical structure of the product. I already
told you if it is a completely solid particle if it is a suspension or solid particles in liquid
medium will have different properties and in continuous flow heating the temperature of the
product usually rises very rapidly. So residence time of lethal temperature range is too short
for complete sterilization.
So what happens is, in this thing so your resistance is small, so your temperature rises rapidly.
So to get the lethality range I had to hold it for some time. So the residence time at lethal
temperature range is too short, so I need to hold it, even though it has already reached the
required temperature I need to hold it for some time to get the required lethal range, lethality
for any sterilization or pasteurization.
So that is where the concept of holding tube came to, it is therefore necessary to hold the
heated product at high temperature for required length of time with no further heat transfer.
No heat transfer will happen, that holding tube will have to hold the particular food product at
that particular temperature. So that is nothing but a holding tube, holding vessel. So this is
decide in inflow thermal processing. So this is after the heating, after the heat exchanger there
will be a holding section so where the food product is maintained at constant temperature, but
it will be hold for some time. Some time in the sense the required time to get the particular
lethality during sterilization or pasteurization.(Refer Slide Time: 45:19)
And apart from that it can be done by ohmic heating as well. So the ohmic heating the
advantages  are it is rapid, instantaneous  and no heat transfer surfaces  involved because
whatever you have seen earlier both retort processing as well as inflow thermal processing
you had to have a heat transfer medium and the packaging surface then again inside of the
packaging surface to the food. So there are series of heat transfer surfaces is also involved
and but here there is no heat transfer surface and no thermal gradient as well as no fouling as
well.
Fouling is nothing but due to after some time that scaling happens inside the exchanger. But
the issue is uniformity and reliability that you may not get during ohmic heating and one
more thing is also there even though you do heating by ohmic, the cooling still depends upon
the heat transfer through surfaces. The cooling water has to be done via any heat transfer
surface only. So this is another disadvantage and I will not be getting the uniform temperature
distribution and reliability and the example would be for ohmic heating is pasteurization of
fruit juices and liquid egg. So this is some glance about ohmic heating.(Refer Slide Time: 46:39)
 (Refer Slide Time: 46:43) 
We will see these examples two and three in subsequent classes.(Refer Slide Time: 46:45)
So these are all the references. Thank you.