Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Ckakraborty  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute  of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 3  
Lecture  14 
Soil P and K Plant Nutrition (Contd.)  
Welcome fr iends to this 14th lecture of NP TEL online certification course of soil fertility and 
fertilizers. And we are at week 3. In this week 3  we are discussing about soil phosphorus and  
potassium for plant nutrition.  In our previous lectures we have discussed about phosphorus cycle 
and phosphorus  availab ility factors in soil also we have discussed about the forms of phosphorus .  
And we have discussed about the in fluence of organic matter pH on  phosphorus availability and 
the species of phosphorus which and their availability , relative availability  at diffe rent pH 
ranges. In our last lecture, we have discussed about the most common phosphoric fertilizers. So, 
in this lecture, we are going to start a new plant nutrient that is soil potassium, but, before going 
to discuss the soil potassium, I would l ike to di scuss some other phosphoric  fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:32)  
 
So, these are the concepts which we are going to cover , phosphorus basic slag  we are going to 
cover first and then we are going to cover , what are the fates o f phosphorus when w e apply t hese 
phosphoric  fertilizers in the soil . W hat are the factors affecting phosphorus fertilizer 
management and then we are going to discuss about compa rative fertilizer value of various phosphate materials. And then we are going to start function of  potassiu m in soil and potassium 
deficiency symptoms in plants. So, these are the some of the basic concepts which we are going 
to cover in this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:15)  
 
So, these are the keywords like basic slag, phosphorus fertilizer, potass ium, necrosis, potassium 
fixation, these are some of the key words of this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:31)  
 
Now, let us start with the basic slag. Basic slag is a phosphoric fertilizer. Now, in the 
manufacturing of high quality steel, that impurities such as s ilicon , sulphur  and phosphorus combined with calcium and rise to the to p of the furnace and are poured  off. So, when solidi fied 
they are fine ly ground and sold as a phosphoric fertilizer, we call it as a basic slag. So, basic slag 
is a phosph atic fertilizer . 
Now, it ranks next to super phosphate as the leading phosph atic fertilizer apart from s uper 
phosphate we apply basic slag as phosph atic fertilizer. According to the international s tandard , it 
should contain at least 13 percent P2O5 out of which  a 80 perc ent should be citric  acid soluble  
and finely ground so, that 80 percent  of the materi al passes through a 100 mesh sieve . So, these 
are some of the  quality criteria of basic slag .  
It also contains traces of zinc, copper, manganese and boron. Basi c slag pro duced in India are of 
low grade containing  on average of P2O5 content of 3 to 8  percent. A lthough the international 
standard clai ms that it has to be minimum 13 percent P2O5 in basic slag. However, in India basic 
slag whatever we get, it contains  low average P2O5 content that is 3 to 8 percent.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:09)  
 
Now,  if you see the what a re fates of first , of basic slag in soil when we apply them. S o, first of 
all the crop removal in an average it will be around 20 percent and range is  5 to 30  percent . 
Phosphorus fixation will be 80 percent in soil and the range varies from 60 to 95  percent . 
Leaching and runoff only less than 2  percent whereas, it ranges from 0 to 10  percent . So, the 
availability of phosphorus when we  apply the basi c slag is hi gher at normal pH  condition.  (Refer Slide Time: 04:59)  
 
So, if we move ahead and see, what are the fates  of phosphorus f ertilizers in soil. B ecause 
phosphorus fertilizer is known for fixation in the soil, when we apply them. So, we have to be 
very very  cautious when we apply this phosph atic fertilizers  in the soil because phosphorus will 
be fixed either in the acidic condition or in alkaline condition as aluminium and iron phosphate 
or calcium phosphate we are already discussed.  
So, it is very importan t to understand the fates of phosphorus fertilizer in soil. So, reaction let us 
consider the reaction of mono calcium phosphate. So, the reaction  of mono calcium phosphate 
when you add ed to soil at of any pH that granules of phosphorus fertilizer wil l absorb  moisture 
yielding a saturated solution of fertilizer.  
So, when we a pply these granules of phosphoric  fertilizers, it will a bsorb the moisture yielding a 
saturated solution of the fertilizer and the solution will have a pH of 1.48 which is highly toxic. 
Now, hydrolysis of this fertilizer on the absorption of moisture will yield phosphoric acid and di -
calcium phosphate dihydrate, di -calcium phosphate d ihydrate.  So, under high moisture content 
you can see this following reaction can occur. So, phosph oric aci d will be form ed in both these 
conditions .  (Refer Slide Time: 06:41)  
 
 
So, let us move ahead and see under low soil moisture condition what will happen . Under lo w 
soil moisture condition the Ca H2PO4 whole 2  will dissociate to form these phosph oric aci d di-
calcium phosphate and water . So, this reaction occurs rapidly and  H3PO4 or phosphoric acid and 
di-calcium phosphate are formed in few day weeks or even within less than an hour .  
When added to a calcareous or alkaline soil where the pH ranges between 8 to, pH ranges 
between around pH 8.0. So, the mono calcium phosphate in fertilizer reacts with calcium 
carbonate or calcium b icarbonate to yield  di calcium phosphate di  hydrate. So, here you can see di calcium phosphate di  hydrate are for med in al l these conditions . When reacts with calcium 
carbonate.  
So, you know in the calcareous soil calcium carbonate predominates also calcium bicarbonate, 
so, while reacting with the calcium carbonate and calcium bicarbonate forms these di calcium 
phosphate di hydra te. So, this is how these fates of you know the fer tilizer determines  by the 
presence of different factors like pH moisture content and also the pres ence of calcium carbonate 
and bi calcium carbonate , calcium bicarbonate in the soil.  
(Refer Slide T ime: 08: 33) 
 
Now, let us see what will be the fate o f phosphorus fertilizer when we  apply the mono 
ammonium phosphate as well as di -ammonium phosphate in calcareous soil. So, we can see 
when mono ammonium phosphate reacts with the calcium carbonate that w ill prod uce di calcium 
phosphate di  hydrate and when di  ammonium phosphate reacts with the fre e calcium carbonate 
in calcareous  soil that will produce again the di  calcium phosphate di  hydrate .  
Also you can see in both these reaction ammonia  is being form ed and y ou know in case of high 
alkaline condition, ammonia being unstable  generally volatilises.  So, here there will be ammonia 
volatilization when the when we apply thes e mono ammonium phosphate or di  ammonium 
phosphate in a calcareous  soil.  (Refer S lide Time: 09:33)  
 
So, let us move ahead and see what are the factors affecting phosphorus f ertilizer management. 
So, these are some of the important factors which governs the phosphorus fertilizer management . 
First of all, placement and mixing whether we  are giving this fertilizer in band placement or we 
are broadcasting it.  
Source of fertilizer is another important factor which affects the phos phorus fertilizer 
management. I nteraction with ammonium nitrate is also an important phosphorus fertilizer 
mana geme nt factor, because it stimulates the phosphorus absorption by root and soil test 
phosphorus level is another important factors that affects the phosphorus fertilizer management.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:19)  
 
Now, if you see pictorially these factors wh ich affect the phosphorus fertilizer management, it 
can be clear that there are different types of inputs of phosphoric  fertilizers like fertilizers , 
manure which consists of which basically cumulatively  add 70  percent  of phosphorus and also 
anima l produc e wil l produce 30  percent  of phosphorus. So, this phosphorus will go to 
phosphorus in solution and then you know moves withi n the soil through phosphorus sorption 
immobilization and mineralization.  
So, 75  percent  of the phosphorus will be going th rough th is ph osphorus sorption immobilizati on 
and mineralization process. C rop harvest will account for 20  percent  of the phosphorus and 5  
percent  will be lost through runoff , less than 1  percent  will be lost to phosphorus leaching 
through preferential flo w via macrosp ores or via  a tile  flow or groundwater flow. So, this is how 
this phosphorus  will move in different sinks.  And so, you can see the fate o f transport , fate and 
transport of P can be can be seen summarily here, where it consists of crop har vest pho sphorus 
runoff and phosphorus leaching and different types of phosphorus sorption and fixation process.  
So, different types of factors will affect this phosphorus fertilizer management . Of course, what 
type of fertilizers we are applying, whe ther i t is a c itric acid  soluble fertilizer, whether it is a 
water soluble fertilizer, whether it is an insoluble fertilizer, whether we are applying them in 
band placement or broadcasting all these will take imp ortant role for main , for determining their 
fate an d transp ort.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:23)  
 
So, if we see the comparative fertilizer value of various phosphate fertilizers So, for maximum 
yields short season fast growing crops require a fertilizer containing a high proportion of water 
soluble phosphorus . Because water sol uble phosphorus remains available for short duration of 
time. So, for short season fast growing crops for those we will go for the water soluble 
phosphorus fertilizers.  
A high degree of water solubility which is greater than 60  percent  is less im portant o n long 
season crops and perennials with extensive root systems such as permanent pastures and 
meadows. Because for long duration crops if we apply these phosphating fertilizers,  water 
soluble phosphor ic fertilizer, they will event ually be  fixed after a cer tain period of time and 
become unavailable.  
Now, a high degree of water solubility may be desirable for early growth and stand establishment 
in crops such as small gra ins to be used for grazing and maiz e. Now with phosphates of l ow 
water  solubility effect iveness decreases with an increase in particle size. So, we have to also take 
care of the particle size when there is insoluble phosphor ic fertilizers. So, these are some of the 
important consideration while applying different typ es of fe rtilizers phosphor ic fertilizers .  (Refer Slide Time: 13:52)  
 
Now on acid  to neutral soil and granular fertilizers with a high degree of water solubility are 
more effective than powdered fertilizers. Now , on acid to neutral soil banned applica tion of 
powdered fertilizer w ith a high degree of water solubility will give better results than mixing the 
fertilizer with the soil.  
Of course, when you mix the fertilizer in the soil that gives more chance for phosphate fixation 
or phosphorus fixation.  However,  when you give the ba nd placement of powdered fertilizer with 
a high degree of water solubility, that will became more available to the blends . On calcareous  
soil granular forms of highly water soluble phosphorus generally give good results and mon o 
ammoni um phosphate will gen erally give better results than di -ammonium phosphate on 
calcareous  soil although both are water soluble.  
So these are some of the important consideration you should keep in mind while applying the 
fertilizer. So , you sh ould b e very v ery careful to select  the proper phosph atic fertilizer, 
depending on several factors of your field like pH , whether you are , you want to grow a short 
duration crop or long duration crop, what type of materials are there in your soil, whether it is a  
calcare ous, whether it is a n acidic soil, wh ether it is a non -neutral soil, all these information’s  are 
highly important when we  apply specially phosph oric fertilizer .  And also to apply the phosph oric fertilizer you ha ve to consider which is the best  proces s of 
application and depe nding on phosphorus fixation phenomena . So, these are some of the 
important consideration when you apply the phosphate fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:43)  
 
So, guys we have completed the phosphate, phosphorus for plant nutriti on. Now,  we are going to 
start potassium, this is the third primary nutrient which is taken up by the plant and this 
potassium is one of the essential major plant nutrient after nitrogen and phosphorus its 
management is more important since large amount of  native potassium is mine d by the crop if it 
is not supplied externally.  
So, there are different types of  crops which heavily mined this  potassium from the soil and if we 
are not supplying this potassium in the soil t o replenish that you know the  loss of potassiu m by 
the or the u ptake of potassium by the crop that will create potassium deficiency. Now, the role of 
potassium in increasing the yield of crops and improving the quali ty or produce is very 
important. B ecause without potas sium, we cannot increase  the yield of the crop o r also we can 
improve  the quality of the product why we are going to discuss .  (Refer Slide Time: 17:03)  
 
Now, potassium is the most abundant macronutrient in soils . Remember that it is the seventh 
most common element in the litho spher e which contains on average 2.6 percent  of potassium. 
So, the total potassium content of Indian soils varies from 0.5 to 3  percent  at the total potassium 
present in soil more than 98  percent  occurs in primary and secondary minerals. We are going to 
discuss di fferent pools of potassium soil protection, but remember that 98  percent  occurs in 
primary and secondary minerals.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:43)  
 So, what are the r oles of potassium in plant growth ? First of all, potassium is associated with the 
movem ent of w ater, nutrients a nd carbohydrates in plant tissue. So, for proper movement of 
water, nutrients and carbohydrates potassium is required. Now , it is involved with enzyme 
activation within the plant which affects the protein starch and adenosine triph osphate or ATP 
production .  
So, not only it affects the enzymes within the plant, it interns these enzyme affects the protein , 
starch and ATP production also. So, you can clearly understand why pota ssium is very much 
indispensable  for plant growth. T he produ ction of  ATP can regula te the rate of photosynthesis. 
So and potassium also helps to regulate the opening and closing of the stomata. So, all these are 
very important functions of potassium in plant growth.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:47)  
 
Now, if we summarize  the role of potassium in plant in different parts of the plant, it will be very 
very clear. So potassium plays  significant role in enhancing crop quality , high levels of 
potassium can improve the physical quality, disease resistant and shelf life of the f ruits, feeding 
value of  the grain and fibre  quality of the cotton . So this one, potassium also plays a major role 
in the transport of water and nutrients to the plant. When potassium is deficient nitrate, 
phosphates, ca lcium, magnesium and ammonium, amino acids  are deficient or depressed and 
potassium is required for every major step of protein synthesis.  The reading of the genetic code in plant cell to produce proteins and enzyme that regulates all 
growth process es would be impossible w ithout adequate pot assium. Potassium activ ates the 
enzyme responsible for the maki ng of starch with inadequate potassium . The level of starch 
declines and soluble  carbohydrates and nitrogen compounds increases .  
Potassium activates at least 60 enzymes involved in plant growt h and po tassium a lso ne utralizes 
organic onions you know helping t o stabilize the pH between 7 to 8 . So, potassium helps with 
the transportation o f sugar through  the plants for ut ilization and storage of  and storage of 
potassium regulates the rate of photo synthesi s and thereby t he rate of sugar production.  
Now, the rate of photosynthesis is controlled by the production of ATP and plan ts depends on 
potassium or to regulate the opening and closing of the stomata , proper functioning of the 
stomata is essentia l for ph otosynthesis, w ater and nutrient transport and plan t cooling. So, you 
can see summarily huge importance of potassium for the plant growth, w ithout the potassium or 
in the in the presence of potassium deficiency, it is very difficult for the plant t o comple te its 
metab olism or metabolic activities. B ecause all the metabolic activities depends on several 
enzymes and enzymes are activated  by the presence of this  potassium.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:22)  
 
So, among the other roles of  potassium in plant gro wth, it increases root growth and improves 
drough t resistance. It maintains t urgor, reduces water loss and wilting . it aids in photosynthesis 
and food  formation. It reduces respiration , preventing energy loss, it enhances translocation of sugar and starch. It produces grain reac hing starch. I t increases plants protein content, build 
cellulose and reduce lod ging and finally it helps retard  crop disease. So , to retard this crop 
disease , to prevent the crop disease potassium is very very important with the  defic iency of  
potassium pl ants are more susceptible to different types of diseases.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:09)  
 
So, it has an important role in pH stabilization, enzyme ac tivation, protein synthesis, stomata 
movement, cell  extension and photosynthesis . It is es sential for the forma tion and transfer of 
starch and sugar especially for potatoes, sweet potato and banana. It increases the plumpness of 
grains and seeds . Straw  and cereals become strong and stiff and thus it reduces lo dging 
otherwise, they will lodge e asily. It is considere d as quality  element for many crops and impart 
resistance against environmental stresses such as draught old and frost.  (Refer Slide Time: 22:47)  
 
Now, w hat are the deficiency symptoms of potassium in the plant? First of all scorch ing of 
leaves and burn ing appearance of leaves, margin , leaves margin and tip is the major potassium 
deficiency symptom. Reduced ability to adapt  to environmental stresses like drought, lodging et  
cetera  is another symptom.  
If potassium is deficient or not sup plied in  adequate  amount, it stunt s plant growth and reduce 
the yield . Tips and ages of the leafs  become yellow which is known as chlorosis and then die 
which is known as necrosis. In some crops, potassium deficiency produces white necrotic spots 
that look s like i nsect dam age and older leafs  turn yellow  initially around margins and di e and 
also irregular fruit development.  
So these are some of the common potassium deficiency symptoms. B ut the major deficiency 
symptom is chlorosis and necrosis of the leafs . You wil l see the se necrotic tissues you know in 
the leaves as well as burning appearance in the leaf margin and tip . So, these are som e of the 
very important or star k features of potassium deficiency symptoms in the plants.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:06)  
 
So, if we see the potassium deficiency symptoms pictorially you can see this is a potassium 
deficiency, you can see these are appearing the potassium deficiency sy mptoms are appearing in 
the leafs  margin. And also you can see the necrosis of leaf tissue arou nd the margin as  you can 
see here in these zones. So these are the stark symptoms of the potassium deficiency. This is of 
course, potassium deficiency in pota to. But you can see that the  potassium deficiency ultimately 
shows tha t their  symptoms in the main ly in the leaf margin.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:52)  
 So this picture shows the potassium deficiency symptoms in corn, showing necrosis along the 
leaf margin s o, you can see these necrotic tissues around these leaf margin, you can clearly see 
and als o you ca n see potassium deficiency in soybean showing the necrotic tissues around the 
leaf margin. So, this is the major de ficiency symptom of potassium in plant.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:20)  
 
Now, if we see , if we compare the potassium deficiency in plant s and their symptoms, thi s 
picture shows a very good example. So, this shows the healthy crop, you know, th is is the leaf of 
a healthy crop a nd you can see, when there is a nitrog en deficiency you can see yellowing  of the 
leaves we know that, when t here is a potassium deficiency t here will be , when there is a 
phosphate deficiency of course, reddish colour  of the leaves we have already discussed this.  
However, when there  is a potassium deficiency, you wi ll see that necrosis of the le af margin. So, 
you can clearly differentiate betw een nitrogen deficiency symptoms, phosphate deficiency 
symptoms and potassium deficiency symptoms . Now, in nutrient deficiency symptoms of a 
potassium deficiency symptoms in plants may be detected as a complete crop  failure at  sibling  
stage and severe  stunting of the plants and specific leaf symptoms internal abnormalities, 
abnormal maturity from the visual sy mptoms.  
So, visually generally, people try to understand whether you know, their leaves are healthy, their 
crops are  healthy  or they are deficient in  certain elements or not. So, for three major primary 
nutrients, you can see these are the major deficiency symptoms, you can see yellowing of the leaves in nitrogen deficiency redding you know, reddish coloration in case of  phospha te 
deficiency and potass ium in case of potassium deficiency you can see necro tic tissues around the 
leaf margin. So, these are the symptoms of potassium deficiency .  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:14)  
 
What are the factors which affect the potassium fixati on? Charge density of the clay, 
vermic ulites fix more potassium compared to smectite s due to internal charge density. So, 
internal charge density of  vermiculite is higher than smectites types. So, that is why it fixed more 
potassium  than smectites. Exten t of the wedge zone d eeper the wed ge zone  higher the amount of 
potassium fixed solution concentration the solution potassium concentration affects the 
equilibrium between exchangeable and fixed potassium in the soil and nature and  concentration 
of other ca tions.  
The presence of cations  like ammonium and rubidium compete with th e potassium ion in the 
interlayer  space. So, that is why some time you know rubidium can replace this potassium , 
rubidium can be considered as a proxy of potassium in the soil. And in  the thi rd point  regarding 
the th ird point the solut ion potassium concentration affects the equilibrium between 
exchangeable and fixed potassium in the soil . We are going to discuss in our next lecture when 
we are going to see the equilibrium between diffe rent for ms of potassium in th e soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 28:36)  
 
So, by this we , let us wrap up this lecture the se are the references which I used for this lecture 
and please go through these documents so, that you can have a more comprehensive overview of 
the p otassium and phosphorus f ertilizers specifically basic slag and fate of phosphorus. So, guys, 
I hope that you have got some new  information regarding phosphoric fertilizer as well  as 
potassium and its  importance for plant nutrition.  
Let us  wrap u p here a nd in the next lecture, we  are going to discuss more about potassium , the 
potassium cycle as well  as the equilibrium between different solid phases of potassium and 
solution phase of potassium and then we are also going to discuss some of the import ant 
potassium  potassic fertilizer s. So, let us wrap up here, let us meet in our next lecture. Thank you 
very much . 