Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  10 
Soil Nitrogen  for Plant  Nutrition  (Contd.)  
 
Welcome  friends  to this, tenth lecture  of NPT EL online  certification  course  of soil fertility  
and fertilizers,  and we are at week  10, and this is the last lecture  of week  10. That is fifth 
lecture  of week  10 and, in this week,  we are talking  about  soil nitrogen  for plant  nutrition.  
And in our previous  lectures,  we have  discussed  about  basics  of soil nitrogen  dynamics.  What  
are the important  sources  of soil nitrogen?   
We have  discussed  different  steps  and different  links  in the soil nitrogen  cycle.  We have  also 
discussed  different  processes  which  are invol ved in soil nitrogen  mobilization.  for example,  
we have  discussed  mineralization , nitrification,  then volatili zation , denitrification,  and we 
have  also discussed  biological  nitrogen  fixation.  We have  discussed  what  are the factors  
which  are involved  or which control  the nitrogen  cycle.   
And also, we have  discussed  different  types  of efficiency  terms  like agronomic  efficiency,  
apparent  recovery  efficiency,  and so on so forth.  We have  also discussed  different  types  of 
nitrogenous  fertilizers.  So, in this lecture, we are going  to cover  the following  concepts.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:43)  
 
 First of all, we are going  to cover  the strategies  to enhance  nitrogen  use efficiency.  And also, 
we are going  to cover  the right  method  of nitrogen  application.  And we are going to discuss  
about  site specific  nutrient  management  or SSNM.  And also, we are going  to cover  the 
resource  conservation  technology  for efficient  nitrogen  use. And finally,  we are going  to 
cover  the systemic  roadmap  from  improving  nitrogen  use efficiency.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  02:13)  
 
So, these  are some  of the keywords  for this, lecture  urea super  granules , leaf colour  chart,  
chlorophyll  meter,  foliar  nitrogen  application,  and neem  coated  urea. So, we are going  to 
discuss  all this in this lecture.   (Refer  Slide Time:  02:30)  
 
So let us start with the strategies  to enhance  nitrogen  use efficiency  now for an to agronomist  
or soil scientist , nitrogen  use efficiency  is a very important  aspect  because  nitrogen  is one of 
the most  important  plant  nutrient  or macron utrient,  which  governs  the growth  of the plant.  
And also, nitrogen,  generally  requires  in huge  quantity  for the planned  growth.   
So, at the same  time,  nitrogen  is generally  lost from  the soil through  different  processes,  
which  we have  already  discussed,  like nitrogen  leaching,  denitrification.  So, there is a focus  
on, efficient  nitrogen  use so that the nitrogen  use efficiency  can be enhanced.  And,  there  are a 
couple  of ways  to which  we can increase  the nitrogen  use efficiency.   
First of all, we have  to select the right  method  of nitrogen  application.  What  are the right  
methods  of nitrogen  application ? Deep placement  of urea super  granules  or foliar  application  
of nitrogen  fertilizers.  We are going  to discuss  both of them  apart  from  that balanced  
application  of fertilizers  and there  are certain  site-specific  nutrient  management  tools,  which  
you can use for enhanced  nitrogen  use efficiency .  
For example,  leaf colour  chart  or LCC,  or, SPAD  or chlorophyll  meter.  These are some  the 
tools  which  can help in soil specific nutrient  management . Soil specific  nutrient  management  
helps  in reducing  the loss of nutrien t and, it increases  the nutrient  use efficiency.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  04:35)  
 
So, there  are also some  slow  and control led release  fertilizers  specific  nitrog enous  fertilizers  
like nitrification  inhibitors  and coated  fertilizers.  So, these  coated  fertilizers  are of several  
types.  For example,  name  coated  urea,  sulphur coated  urea,  polymer  coated  urea.  So, the 
basic  idea behind  these  coated  fertilizer s is to decrease  or prevent  the nitrification  process  or 
slow  down  the nitrification  process  so that the nitrate  formation  gets reduced  and as a result,  
there  will be less nitrate  depletion  or less nitrate  loss from  the soil.  
There  are certain  resource  conservation  technology,  which  we are going  to discuss.  And apart  
from  that, of course,  there  are some  there  is an important  concept  called  integrated  nutrient  
management.  So, these  are some  of the strategies  to enhance  the nitrogen  use efficiency.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  05:45 ) 
 
Now  let us talk about  the right  method  of nitrogen  application.  Now,  one of the right  methods  
of nitrogen  application  in the field is deep  placement  of urea super  granules , as you can see in 
this picture,  these  are the urea super  granules  they are granulated.  So, this deep  placement  of 
these  urea super  granules  1 to 2 gram  of urea super  granules  at 5-to-10-centimetre  depth  in 
the lowland  paddy, reduced  zone , in the lowland  paddy  there  a stagnant  water.   
So, there  is a reduced  zone  in the soil. So, if we place  the urea super  granules  or granulated  
urea in 1 or 2 grams  at 5-to-10-centimetre  depth,  that will reduce  the loss of nitrogen  by, 
through,  by reducing  the runof f or ammonia  volatilization  or denitrification . Now,  putting  
this urea in mud balls  in 1 is to 6 volumetric  basis  for 1 or 2 days before  its application  in the 
field also facilitates  the absorption  of ammonia  in soil colloids,  thus reducing  the leeching  
losses.   
Now  that soil colloids,  the have  different  soil colloids , have  the capabilit y of absorbing  or 
absorbing  the ammoni um ions by which  we can reduce  the loss of nitrogen . So, what  are the 
benefits  of these  deep  placement  of urea super  granules?  First of all, it limits  that 
concentration  of nitrogen  in flood  water  and in the surface  oxidized layer,  when  you place  the 
urea super  granules  in deep,  in the reduced  zone  of lowland  paddy , that will first of all, 
reduce  or limit  the concentration  of nitrogen  in the surface  oxidized  layer.   
Secondly,  it decreases  the nitrogen  losses  through  run of ammonia  volatilization  or 
denitrification , as I have  already  mentioned . However,  simultaneously  there  are certain  
disadvantages  also. first of all, this deep  placement  is labour  intensive , it requires  skilful  
labour  to place  these  urea super  granules  or USG  in right  place.  Secondly,  there  is a lack of suitable  applicators  for deep  placement  of urea super  granules , and finally,  the lack of 
availability  of urea super  granules  in some  places  also limits  its use.  
So, these  are some  of the aspects  of urea super granules . These  are some  of the advantages  
and disadvantages  and benefits  of using  the so urea super  granules .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  08:50)  
 
you will also frequently  come  across  another  term that is called  prilled  urea. Now,  what  is a 
difference  betwee n granular  or urea granules  and prilled  urea.  Now this prilled  urea and 
granular  both types  of urea are these  are the solid  nitrogenous  fertilizers  that are used in 
agriculture.  These  are available  in the market,  but the difference  between  prilled  urea and 
granular  urea is prilled  urea takes  a little time to dissolve  in water,  whereas  granular  takes  a 
lot of time to dissolve.  So, from  that point  of view,  granular  urea or urea granules  are better  
than prilled  urea.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  09:33)  
 
 
Now,  there  is a case study,  which  was published  by Pande  and Mohanty  in the year 1986  and, 
that says the productivity  of rice, which  surface  application  and deep placement  of 
nitrogenous  fertilizer  in different  ecosystem  of rainfed  lowland,  in India.  So, if you can see 
that when  there  is prilled  urea surface  application  of prilled  urea,  that and there  are different  
types  of method  like alternate  wetting  and drying,  then shallow  lowland,  or intermediate  or 
intermediate  lowland.   
You can see in all these  three  condition s when  you compare  this prilled  urea and urea super  
granules,  you will see that rice productivity  is always  had when  there  is a deep  placement  of 
urea super  granules  as compared  to the surface  application  of prilled  urea. So, that shows  the benefit  of using the urea super  granules  as compared  to prilled  urea. And this is because  urea 
super  granules  takes  time to dissolve,  whereas  the prilled  urea can be easily  dissolved.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:53 ) 
 
 
Now  also, it has been  observed  by Patel  in 1989,  that the potential  ammonium  volatilization  
loss is higher  in case of prilled  urea followed  by neem  coated  urea, followed  by USG or urea 
super  granules . So, if you use the deep  placement  of urea super  granules  that can drastically  
reduce  the ammonium  volatilizatio n loss.  
So, if you see this, this graph,  it is quite  clear  that after the days of planting  the ammonium  
nitrogen  concentration  is, this nitrous  concentration  in floodwater  is lowest  in case of, urea 
granules . And also, whereas  these  nitrogen  concentration  in floodwater  water  is higher  in case of, these  prilled  urea as well as the neem  coated  urea. This is the neem  coated  urea and 
this is the prilled  urea, so that shows  the benefit  of using  the urea super  granules .  
Also,  you can see here that changes  in ammonium  nitrogen  in soil from  0 to 15-centimetre  
layer  with different  methods  of nitrogen  fertilizer  application.  So, you can see here when  they 
applied  the urea super  granules,  the urea super  granules  produces  higher  ammonium  content  
in the soil as compare d to the other  two methods  that is neeem  coated  urea and prilled  urea. 
So, that shows  the benefit  of using  the deep  placement  of, urea super  granules  for reducing  
the ammoni um volatilization  loss from  soil.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:00)  
 
Another,  useful  meth od for nitrogenous  fertilizer  application  is foliar  application.  Now,  there  
are certain  advantages  as well as disadvantages  of foliar  application.  First advantage  is it is 
less subjected  to surface  runoff,  microbial  immobilization,  volatilization , and denitrification . 
Of course,  when  you apply  the fertilizer  in bare soil, there  are certain  process  through  which  
it gets lost, for example,  surface  runoff,  microbial  immobilization , volatilization , and 
denitrification .  
However,  when  you apply  directly  through  foliar  application,  then these  loss, the chances  of 
nitrogen  loss will be reduced.  Secondly,  quick  recovery  from  nitrogen  deficiency  in dry 
farming  areas  where  soil moisture  is a constraint.  So, soil moistur e, when  there  is a constraint  
of soil moisture,  foliar application  can quickly  recover  the nitrogen  deficiency  symptom.  At 
the same  time,  there  are certain  disadvantages,  also what  are those  disadvantages,  first of all, 
washing  out of applied  fertilizer  after heavy  rainfall.   So, when  there  is a heavy  rainfall,  the fertilizer  gets easily  washed  away  when there  is a foliar  
application . Secondly,  in case of foliar  application,  it requires  frequent  application,  which  is 
labour  intensive  and as also cost ineffective.  So, these  are some  of the downside  of foliar 
application  of nitrogenous  fertilizer.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:47)  
 
 
Now,  another  important  term of increasing  the nitrogen  use efficiency  is site specific  nutrient  
management.  Now  site-specific  nutrient  management,  can be of two types,  one is prescri ptive  
site specific  management.  Another  one is corrective  site specific  management.  Now,  what  is a 
difference ? Now in case of prescriptive  nitrogen , suppose  we are considering  the nitrogen  
management.   So, in case of prescriptive  nitrogen  management,  this relies  on information  generated  before  
the planting  of the crop.  So, before  the planting  of the crop,  we rely on this type of 
prescription -based  approach.  However,  there  is a corrective  nitrogen  management,  also this 
method  employed  diagnostic  tools  to assess crop nitrogen  status  during  the growth  of the 
crop,  which  are used as a basis  for decision  about  further  nitrogen  application.   
For example,  in case of this corrective  nitrogen  measurement,  we can use either  leaf colour  
chart  or SPAD  meter  for chlorop hyll measurement.  So, you can see the difference  clearly  
between  the prescriptive  nitrogen  management  and another  one is corrective  nitrogen  
management.  So, the site specific  nutrient  management  can be achieved  by both these  ways  
for nitrogenous  fertilizer  or nitrogen  uptake  by the plant.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:24)  
 
Now,  let us consider  what  is leaf colour  chart?  Nw, this is a leaf colour ed, as you can see in 
this picture.  So, this leaf collected  is very simple  tool, and it depicts  the gradients  of green  
hues based  on wave  length  characteristics  of rice leaves  from  yellowish  green  to dark green . 
So, as the nitrogen , from  nitrogen  deficiency  to nitrogen  sufficiency,  the shades  vary from  
yellowish  green  to dark green.   So, by matching  the colour  of the leave s with these  different  shades  in this leaf colour  chart,  
we can determine  qualitatively  the deficiency  or sufficiency  of nitrogen  in the plant.  Now  in 
India,  generally  for lowland  rice, these  LCC  score  less than equal  to 4 is considered  as a 
threshold  for further  application  of nitrogen ous fertilizers.  Of course  there  are certain  
advantages  of these  approach.   
First of all, it is very easy to handle.  It is less expensive  and is an accurate  tool for 
determining  the nitro gen status  in rice field.  So, this is the leaf colour  chart -based  approach,  
or, site specific  nutrient  management.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:53)  
 
Now,  if you go to the chlorophyll  meter -based  nutrient,  management  approach  or SPAD  
meter  based  nitrogen  management,  it offers  relative  measurement  of leaf chlorophyll  content  
and SPAD  values  generally  less than equal  to 35 to 30 or 37 is used as a critical  value  for 
further  top addressing  of nitrogen  in lowland  rice field.  What  is the advantage  of these  
chlorophyll  meter?   
This is a highly  sophisticate d and sensitive  tool to measure  nitrogen  status  in the crop.  
However,  there  are certain  disadvantages  also, first of all, is high-cost linear  relationship  
between  SPAD  value  and nitrogen  status  varie s with growth  stages  and cultivars  and 
environmental  and other  stress  factors  like pest, disease,  et cetera,  can confound  the SPAD  
reading  and finally  it has no use until the leaves  are fully  expanded.   So, these  are some  the disadvantages  of a this chlorophyll  meter  or SPAD  meter.  When  you 
consider  site specif ic nitrogen  management.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:11)  
 
 
Now,  if you see the different  barriers,  slow  and control led release  fertilizer  which  generally  
we use for improving  the nitrogen  use efficiency,  we can have  this list, first of all, the coated  
with inert material,  sometime  the fertilizer,  suppose  urea is coated  with inert material.  So, 
what  are the examples  urea coated  with polymer,  lac, gypsum,  sulphur , and rock phosphate.  
The second  approach  is enlargement  of the granules  like urea super  granule,  whic h we have  
already  discussed  or granular  urea.  Third one is limited  solubility  forms  of urea, what  are those  urea form , oxam ide, urea-z. So, 
these  are the limited  soluble forms  of urea. The fourth  approach  is quoted  with urease  
inhibitors.  Now,  that urease is required  for hydrolysis  of urea.  Now,  when  there  is an urease  
inhibitor,  of course,  the release  of nitrogen  will be inhibited.  What  are those ? Hydroquinone , 
phenyl,  phosphordi amidate  or PPD.  
So, these  are some,  urease  inhibitors  and also, there  are some urea of fertilizers , which  are 
quoted  with nitrification  inhibitors,  so that the formation  of nitrate  get reduced.  For example,  
nitrapyrin,  AM, DCD , ATC.  These  are the scientific  names  in the parenthesis.  So, you can 
see it is like DMPP.  These  are different  types  of nitrification  inhibitors,  which  slows  down  
the formation  of nitrate  in the soil. So, the slow  and delayed  nitrogen  release  pattern,  by this, 
application  of these  fertilizers,  commensurate  nitrogen  requirement,  with the crop demand.  
So, this is how we can increase  the nitrogen  use efficiency  and decrease  the loss of nitrogen  
from  the soil.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:28 ) 
 
 Now,  what  are the advantages  on disadvantages  of nitrogen , nitrification  inhibitors,  which  we 
have  already  discussed  in our previous  slide,  there  are certain  nitrogen  inhibitors.  Now,  
nitrogen  inhibitors  generally  slows  down  the conversion  of ammonium  to nitrate  due to, by 
inhibiting  the conversion.  Now,  of course,  there  are certain  advantages  for that, for example,  
higher  avail ability  of ammonium  ion concentration  in soil, which  is less subjected  to leeching  
and denitrification  losses.   
Secondly,  inhibitor  effect  on methane  oxidation  and nitrous  oxide  emission.  So, these  are 
some  of the greenhouse  gases . So, the emission  of these different  types  of greenhouse  gases  
can be also reduced,  by this nitrification  inhibitor.  However,  there  are certain  disadvantages  
also like high cost, lack of availability  in Indian  market  for these  nitrification  inhibitors.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:36)  
 
Now,  there  is a case study  by Majumdar , in 2000  where  we can see that soil nitrate  in a rice 
field,  then without  fertilizer  nitrogen , different  nitrification  inhibitors.  So, we can clearly  see 
that when  urea is applied  soil nitrate  contain  in the rice field is clearly  higher  in case in the 
initial  days,  and which  is clearly  less in case of different  types  of nitrification  inhibitors.  So, 
that shows  the that proves  the application  of these  nitrification  inhibitors  can reduce  the 
formation  of nitrate  in the soil, thereby  reducing  their leeching  loss and other  types  of loss.  
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  23:26)  
 
Now,  we have  discussed  different  types  of coated  fertilizer.  Now,  one of them  is well,  most  
famous  is neem  coated  urea.  now neem  coated  urea generally  we remember  that oil derived  
from  the seeds  of neem  contains,  different  types  of melicians  of which,  epinimbin then,  
deacetyl,  and then salanin, and azadirachtin  are the active  fractions,  which  have  dose 
dependent  nitrification  inhibition  action.  So, these  are like epinimbin,  deacetyl,  salanin,  
azadirachtin .  
These  are these  are the active  faction  which  has the nitrification  inhibition  effect.  Now  prilled  
urea are uniformly  coated  with neem  oil or nimin  which  is which  is neem  seed kernal  extract,  
neem  cake,  et cetera, to produce  these  neem  coated  urea as you can see in this picture,  these  
are neem  coated  urea.  
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  24:33)  
 
Now  there  is a case study  and where  percent  increase  in yield  of rice and nitrogen  and use 
efficiency  by applying  different  variants of neem  coated  urea over untreated  urea were  
compared,  and you can see here by applying  the 20 percent  neem  cake here.  And then in 
there's  a neem  coated  urea there  is another  variant  of neem  coated  urea. So, applying  these  
different  variances  of neem coated  urea, you can see that there  is a percent  increase  in grain  
yield  in neem  coated  urea in this case,  it is 1.7 percent .  
It is 29 percent  and 12.6 percent . Of course , there  are different  locations.  So, also the 
apparent  recovery  efficiency  of nitrogen  in neem  coated  urea over uncoated  urea, you can 
see, there  is a percent  increase,  11.9 percent  increase  in case of these  NOC.  So, that shows  
that when  we apply  different  types  of coated  urea, that can increase  the nitrogen  use 
efficiency.   
 (Refer  Slide Time:  25:44)  
 
There  is another  coated  that is called  sulphur  coated  urea or SU where  molten  elemental  
sulphur  is sprayed  over preheated  urea peels  and crack s and pores  of the sulphur  coating  are 
sealed by micro  crystalline  wax sealant . So, these  are known  as sulphur  coated  urea. What are 
the advantages ? Advantage  is controlled  dissolution  of fertilizer  nitrogen , which  synchronizes  
with peak  period  of nitrogen  demand  of crop.   
Of course,  there  are two disadvantages,  first of all, the sulphur  treated  urea is prone  to non-
uniform  distribution  of damage  and perfectly  coated  granules,  it unavailable  in most  of the 
part of India.  So, these  are some  of the disadvantages  of sulphur  coated  urea.  
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  26:38 ) 
 
Now  there  is another  case study  by Ron et al in 2001,  where  we can see the dynamics  of 
ammonium  nitrogen  in floodwater  and volatilization , loss in alkali  soil following  application  
of urea at slow  or control led release  urea in rice. So, you can see here in this graph,  it is 
clearly  seen that as the days after fertilization,  the percentage  of applied  nitrogen  volatilized  
is always  higher  when  there  is ureal granules . And when  we use different  coated  urea, the 
volatilization  loss of nitrogen  is getting  reduced  from  these  urea granules  to then then lac 
coated  urea,  then sulphur  coated  urea, and urea super  granules . So, you can see here that how 
these,  unco ated urea and different  types  of coated  urea can change  the nitrogen  and 
volatilization  situation  in case of rice plant.   
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  27:50)  
 
What  are the research  conservation  technology?  One of the most  important  research  
conservation  technology  which  we are using  nowadays  is called  the combined  harvester.  
Now,  after introduction  of this technology,  nowadays,  it is very popular  throug hout India.  
And after an introduction  of this technology  a combined  harvester,  a large  portion  of rice 
straw  remain  unutilize d and, that can be a good  source  of organic  nitrogen  in the soil. 
If you consider  the advantage  of these  research  conservation  technology  for nitrogen  
management,  long term application  of this technology  can increase  readily  mineralized  
organic  nitrogen , thus can reduce  the amount  of chemical  fertilizer  when  you incorporate  this 
rice straw,  in the soil that can reduce  the requirement  of nitrogen  fertilizer  and also there  are 
some  disadvantages  also, for example,  there  is a lack of good  incorporator  and at initial  
stages  of the nitrogen  immobilization  is higher  than nitrogen  mineralization.   
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  29:00)  
 
Another  importa nt term is integrated  nutrient  management  or INM.  Now  INM  is an 
integrated  approach  where  we use both biological,  chemical,  and cultural  practices  of nutrient  
management.  So, here not only we rely on synthetic  fertilizer  application,  but at the same  
time,  we modify  our cultural  practices.  Also,  we apply  the biological  sources  of different  
nutrients  like manure .  
So, there  are certain  advantages  of these  integrated  nutrient  management.  First of all, it 
mitigate s the ill effect  of overuse  of synthetic  fertili zer. Secondly,  nitrogen  loss is minimized  
and soil health  is well maintained.  However,  it has one disadvantage,  also lack of proper  
knowledge,  which  can cause  negative  result.   
So, we have  to properly  understand  what  is integrated  nutrient  management,  and we have  to 
judiciously  apply  this concept  so that the maximum  benefit  can be harvested.  So, these  
integrated  nutrient  management  is a very important  concept  for improving  the nitrogen  use 
efficiency.  We are going  to discuss  this integrated  nutrient  managem ent in our upcoming  
lectures  in details,  but at the, this time,  we should  remember  that these  INM  is one of the 
most  important  concept  for one of the most  important  concepts  for, improving  the nitrogen  
use efficiency.   
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  30:31)  
 
 
This is a systematic  roadmap  for improving  the nutrient,  nitrogen  use efficiency  I can say 
nitrogen  use efficiency  using  improved  agronomy.  So, traditional  agricultural  practices,  is 
always  depends  on high input  system  where  nitrogen  and overload  create s nitrog en pollution.  
And also there,  if there  is a low input  system  that can results  in nitrogen  paucity  at food 
insecurity,  so improved  agricultural  practices  can improve  the synchrony  of nitrogen  supply  
and demand.   It can utilize  the modelling  for decision  support.  It can develop  enhance  efficiency , fertilizer  
and so on and of course,  plant breeding  another  important  aspect  for enhancing  the nitrogen  
use efficiency  shift to trade -based  breeding  for root nitrogen  acquisition  efficiency,  shoot  
physiological  efficiency , nitrogen  harvest  index,  beneficial  plan,  micro be interaction,  
including  beneficial  nitrogen  and fixation , organic  nitrogen  immobilization , inhibition  of 
nitrification.   
So, these  are some  of the important  traits  which  the breeders  should  consider  for developing  
the new breed  of new plant  variety  so that that can enhance  the nitrogen  use efficiency . 
Beneficial  nitrogen  and fixation,  which  can improve  of deploy  symbiotic  nitrogen  fixers  in 
legum e and develop  associative  nitrogen  fixation  in non-legume s, develop  nodulating  
nitrogen  fixing  cereals,  and develop  nitrogen  and fixing  plants,  soil nitrogen , and cycling  like 
develop  and utilize  cover  crops  to capture  the soluble  matters  mobilizing  by nitrogen  cycling,  
deploy  no-till to reduce  the off-season  mineralization  of an organic  nitrogen  so on.  
Then  all these  can result  in sustainable  nitrogen  management.  So, these  are some  of the ways  
through  which  we can enhance  the nitrogen , use efficiency .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  32:43)  
 
Now, future  scope  of research.  What  are the future  scope  of research ? Breeding  strategies  
should  be adapted  to develop  new nitrogen  use efficiency,  efficient  varieties.  Technology  
needs  to be developed  for field scale  for nitrogen  fixing  in non-legumes , fixation  in non-
legumes,  modern  tools like, remote  and proximal  sensing , GIS, decision  support  system , 
precision  farming  technology  needs  to be fine-tuned,  and finally  low-cost technology  for manufacturing -controlled  release  products  needs  to be developed.  So, these  are some  of the, 
futur e scope  of research.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  33:24)  
 
 
So, with this we wrap  up, let us wrap  up this week  2 of lectures,  where  we have  discussed  the 
importance  of nitrogen  for plant  nutrition.  These  are some  of the references  which  I used for 
this.  
(Refer  Slide Time:  33:41)  
 
For this lecture .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  33:46)   
And, please  feel free to go through  these  references  to enrich  yourself  so that you can have  
more  comprehensive  knowledge  of nitrogen  nutrition  of the plant.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  34:04)  
 
So, these  are some  of the references  which  we have  used.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  34:07 ) 
 
So, thank  you and, let us meet  in our week  3, where  we will discuss  the importance  of 
phosphorus  and potas sium for plant  nutrition.  Thank  you. 