Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Ckakraborty  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 3  
Lecture 15  
Soil P and K Plant Nutrition (Contd.)  
Welcome friends to this last lecture of week 3 of NP TEL online certification course of soil 
fertility and fertilizers. And we are at week 3, where we are discussing the soil phosphorus and 
potassium for plant nutrition.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:41)  
 
And in this lecture, we are going to discuss this fo llowing  topics potassium cycle and then we are 
going to discuss the classification of potassium fertilizers. We are also going to discuss the 
potassium manufacturing , forms of potassium and then luxury consumption of potassium and 
potassium mobilization. S o, thes e are the major concepts which we are going to discuss in this 
lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 00:58)  
 
Also, these are the key words of this lecture like langbeinite, potassium cycle, MOP or Muriate  
of potash , then l uxury consumption, Potassium mobil ization t hese are some of the key words of 
this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:11)  
 
So, in the previous lecture, we have already seen what is the importance of potassium for plant 
growth , we have seen that plant growth as well as quality of the produce i s mostly d ependent on 
potassium in the soil without the potassium presence in the soil, you know plants  growth is severely restricted , not only that drought resistant as well as other you know, and also lodging 
and all these things are being controlled by potassium in soil.  
Now, if we see the potassium cycle, this potassium cycle is also dependent on different types of 
solution form as well as solid forms of potassium. So, if w e start you know, let us see the , what 
are the inputs? S o, here the inputs of po tassium in  the soil can be either mi neral fertilizer or 
through manures  or through different plant residues .  
Now, these plant residues when you apply these plant residues as well as  manures  and mineral 
fertilizer that can add to soil solution potassium. N ow, rememb er in case of potassi um plant 
uptake the K plus form. S o, this is the available fo rm of potassium for in soil. Plant can only take 
this K  plus form from the soil .  
Now, a some portion of soil solution potassium can be lost through  leachi ng. Also these soi l 
solution potassium is in equilibrium with exchangeable potassium. Now , in case of exchangeable 
potas sium, one of the source of this  exchangeable potassium is decomposed plant residues and 
there is an equilibrium between non exchangeable  potassiu m and an exchangeable potassium . 
And there is another phase that is fixed mineral potassium.  
Now, remember that the conversion  or the availability of potassium from the fixed mineral 
potash fixed mineral to non exchangeable potassium is very slow . So, thi s is very  slow and also 
the conversion of non exchangeable potassium to actionable potassium is also very slow. 
However, as far as the availability of the potassium is concerned, soil solution potassium  and 
exchangeable potassium are the  two avail able form s of plan t potassium. So, plant potassium is 
more or less governed by the soil solution potassium and also the potassium which are attached 
to the exchangeable site. So, th is is how the potassium  cycle maintains in the soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 0 4:30)  
 
So, if we see in more detail way, it will be more clear. So , here you can see these plus signs are 
showing the inputs to the soil. So , we can see here plant residues as well as mineral fertilizers 
and animal manure or bio solids we can see here. So , all the se are considered as input in the soil 
solution pota ssium. S o, from the soil solution potas sium plant uptake the ir required potassium 
nutrition. So, these three are inpu ts however, what are the losses? C rop harvest is one of the 
losses of pot assium and al so runo ff or erosion is another loss of potassium , also leaching is a 
form of potassium loss.  
So, let us see how the soil solution potassium is maintained. So, soil solution pot assium has an 
equilibrium , they are in equilibrium with exchangea ble potassium,  these exchangeable potassium 
are generally present in the exchang eable sides of clay minerals or  secondary minerals and the 
soil solution potassium ions can either adsorbed rapidly adsorbed onto thes e exchangeable sides 
of the clay minerals or the opposit e is desorption .  
So, these adsorb  potassium get dissolved, which is also a rapid process. So, this adsorption and 
desorption of potassium from soil solution to clay and vice  versa is a rapid process and these are 
governed by the c oncentration of the p otassium in the soil solution. Also, you can see that 
potassium is also present in mineral form and fixed from in the interlayer space.  
So, the weathering of the mineral potassium to fixed potassium is very slow, and also the release 
of these fixed potass ium from the interlayer space  we have , we already know that there are interlayer potassium, if we follow my soil science course, you will see that the interlayer 
potassium is present in soil science and technology course.  
So, you will  see that the interlay er potassium is present in illite structure. So, these interlayer 
potassium are very tightly bound an d they are very slow , they can be released very slowly. So, 
the conversion of fixed potassium to exchang eable potassium is a very slo w proce ss and opposite 
process is a fixed session , where the exchangeable potassium get fixed in the interlayer space.  
So, you can see here the mineral potassium  the conversion of mineral potassium to fix potassium 
is quite a slow process also the convers ion of fixed potassium to  exchangeable potassium is a 
further slow process . However, the conversion of exchangeable to soil solution and so, through 
the process of desorption and opposite process is  adsorption is a rapid or rap id process.  
So, also we can see the re is a input  of potassium by the weathering of this potassium mineral 
which  goes to the soil solution and also there is a equilibrium between the fixed potassium and 
also the soil solution potassium . However, this  movem ent is very very slow. The ma jor 
potassium available f irms are soil  solution potassium and exchangeable potassium which 
governs the potassium availability to the plant.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:23)  
 
Now, if we see the potassium cycle some of the major points  will let us discuss original  source  of 
potassium is b asically the primary mineral . So, whatever we can see here, the origin al source is 
the primary minerals,  what are the primary minerals? Mica s is like biotite and m uscovite also potassium feldspar  like o rthoclase and microcline. The se are the major source o f potassium. In 
soil they are primary minerals.  
Potassium, is released from the minerals during the weathering process and when available for 
plant uptake, it is taken up by the plants in large quantit ies. In natural ecosystem  potassium is 
return ed to the  soil by rainwater leaching of foliage and by plant residue or as waste from 
animals that feed unplanned.  
Remember that potassium is lost by soil erosion and runoff and leaching to the groundwater. 
Most potassium in agriculture ec osystem  are lost to remov al of the crops and crop residues from 
the soil. So , crop removal or crop based mining of potassium is the major source of potassium 
loss from the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:35)  
 
So, what are the fac tors which affects the pot assium ava ilability in the s oil? F irst of a ll, type of 
the colloids. B ecause type of the colloids  determine whether how much amount of potassium 
will be fixed by the colloids  structure. So,  ability of various colloids  to fix potas sium varies from 
one colloid  to anot her colloid  and ge nerally they are fi xed by 2 is to 1 type of cl ay minerals . And 
also waiting and drying up the soil is another important factor of phosphorus potassium 
availability. So, physically affect which p hysically affects the structure o f the colloids. F reezing 
and thawing also physically affects the structure of the colloids  and thereby they governs the 
potassium availability.  Soil acidity is another factor because it increases high pH increases the fixa tion of potassium 
because of less  proton  and aluminium ions at  the exchangeable side. So, when there is a high pH 
of course, there will be less proton as well as aluminium ions in the exchange  side. So, they will 
be replaced by the potassium ions, which is  also a positively charged cation .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:43)  
 
Now, if we see the forms of potassium in the soil we have already discussed, but let us discuss in 
more detail. So, potassium in the primary mineral structure we have already discussed, this i s 
basically una vailable s o, 90 to  98 percent of the soil potas sium are present in this unavailable 
form that is, primary mineral structure.  
Second form is potassium is non exchangeable position in non exchangeable position of 
secondary minerals. So, these  are also slowly available. Fixed  potass ium is not easily 
exch angeable a nd in equilibrium with more available forms . However, their conversion is very 
slow. Third one is potassium in exchangeable form from soil colloid  surface they are readily 
available as  I have already told you, t hey co nstitut es around one to 2 per cent o f the all soil 
potassium and 90  percent of this fraction or form is readily available.  
And finally, potassium ions soluble in water, they are readily available and subjected to leaching 
and also they are at equilibrium w ith act ionable  form. So, thes e two forms governs as I have told 
you previously, these two forms governs the potential nutrition of the crop. B ecause the other two forms are largely un -accessible and they are also very slowl y, they convert to other forms 
very slowl y.  
(Refer Slide Time : 12:09)  
 
So, this is also another representation so you can see the conversion from mineral to non 
exchangeable is very slow and also from conversion of non exchangeable to exchangeable is als o 
slow however, the conversion or  the eq uilibrium between the soil solution and readily available 
potassium or exchangeable potassium is very rapid a nd plant  generally take up the potassium ion 
from this soil solution fo rms. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:40 ) 
 Now, t hese primary minerals they ar e basic ally unavailable forms of potassium depending on 
soil type approximately 90 to 98  percent of total soil potassium is found in this form and the 
minerals feldspars and mica contain most of this potassium and pla nts cannot  use the potassium 
in this cr ystalli ne insoluble form. So, it is not being  so, since most of these potassium are  present 
in this form in crystallize crystalline form. So, plant cannot take this form you know plant can 
only take potassium ions fro m the soil  solution.  
So, over a long period o f time these minerals w eather or break down and potassium is released. 
However, this process is too slow to supply the full potassium need s of the crop as this mineral 
weather some potassium moves to this slowl y availabl e pool. So, we can clearly se e that 
although they can very slowly weather and goes  to the other pools, plant availability of the 
potassium is not governed or depend ent on this primary minerals or  unavailable form some 
potassium.  
(Refer Slide Ti me: 13:53)  
 
Now, the second form that is slow ly available potassium , this is  secondary minerals and 
compounds. So, this form of potassium is trapped between layers of clay minerals like illite and 
is frequently referred to as being fixed. So, g rowing plants reme mber that in the illite struc ture, 
the interlayer  space is almo st negligible because they are being occupie d by these small 
potassium ions and thereby locking the structure.  So, they are so tightly fixed in this interlayer space of illite they cannot b e easily replaced. So, 
that i s why t hey are very slowly available or almost  unavailable. So, growing plant not plants 
cannot use much of a  during the single growing season and it can serve as a reservoir for readily 
available potassium   
It can be served as  a resolver for readily avail able po tassium but growing plants can not use much 
of it. The amount of it varies with the dominating type of clay i n the soil of course, the more the  
potassium containing or entrapping mineral will be there in  the soil more pot assium this form 
that is seco ndary t hese unavailab le forms will be  there . Montmorillonite clays fixed potassium 
when soils become dry because potassium is trapped between the layers in the clay minerals 
when the soil gets wet t his potassium is released.  
However, illite clays also fixe d potas sium between the layers when they become dry, but they do  
not release all the fixed  potassium when the soil is gets wet. P art of the reason is, this potassium 
has high charge density and the y are not expanding. So, they do not release this potassium  from 
the interlayer space and ultim ately what happens this potassium gets more tightly fixed in the 
interlayer space.  
If you remember the structure  of the illite, all the isomorphous substitution  occurs in the 
tetrahedral shea th and ultimately negative c harge wh ich develops in the  illite structure gets 
occupied by these potassium ions which are small, which are tightly fixed in the interlayer space 
and ultimately, they are not easily released from this  mineral.  (Refer  Slide Time: 16:15)  
 
The thi rd form  is readily available potassium , these are  dissolved in soil water which are water 
soluble in nature and held on clay particles exchange sites, which are found on th e surface of the 
clay particles due to different types of c harge development in the clay t here a re the external sites 
the excha nge sites where different types of cations can be  adsorbed.  
So, these readily available potassium are basically absorbed in  the exchange sit es of the clay 
minerals or  surfa ce of the clay mi nerals , from where they can b e readi ly available, the potassium 
attached to clay mineral exchange sit es is more readily available for plant growth than the 
potassium trapped between the layers of the clay minerals .  
Of course, when the potassium is trapped  between the layers, it is ve ry diff icult to remove them 
from the interlayer space. However, this  readily available potassium is fixed or not fixed or 
attached or adsorbed onto the surface of the clay minerals and that is why they are readily 
available. So , you can see here slowly ava ilable potassium, they remain in equi librium with the 
exchangeable potassium which is also remain in equilibrium with the water soluble potassium.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:29)  
 
Now, what  are the factors which affect the potassiu m plant potassium uptake. The se are some of 
the factors like soil  moisture soil aeration, and soil temperature these are the major factors which 
affects the plant potassium uptake. Let us , discuss s oil moisture , higher soil moisture usually 
means greater po tassium availability, increas ing soi l moisture increases potassi um movement to 
plant root and enhances availability of course, because plant can take up these potassium which 
are present in soil solution, more wat er means higher soil moisture m eans higher potassium 
availability.  
Seco ndly, s oil aeration and oxygen leve l, air is necessary for root respiration and potassium 
uptake, root activity and subsequent potassium uptake decreases as soil moisture co ntent 
incre ases to saturation. O xygen levels are very l ow in saturated soil . Third i s root temperature, 
root activity plant functions and physiologica l processes all increase as soil  temperature increase 
and increased physiological activity leads to increased potassi um uptake. So, the optimum soil 
temperature for uptake is 60 to 80 degree  Fahren heit and potassium uptake r educes as low soil 
temperature , at low soil temperature. So, these are some of the impor tant factors of which affects 
the plant  potassium uptake.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:55)  
 
Now, let us see , what are the common fertilizer s of po tassium?  So, you can see t he most 
common potassic fertilizer is potassium chloride, the chemical formulas KCL we also know 
these as MOP or Muriate  of potash. So, the spelling is Muriate  of potash. S o, Muriate of potash 
is basically potassium chlorid e and i t contains 60 to 62  percen t of K2O and another important 
you know potassic fertilizer is potassium sulfate, the formula is K2SO4  contents 50  percent  of 
K2O, potassium magnesiu m sulfate is also the chemical formula is thi s contains 20  percent K2O  
potassium thiosulfate contains 17  percent  of K2O  and potassium nit rate contains 44 percent of 
K2O.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:02)  
 
Now, let us discuss the potassium chloride or Muriate  of potash. No w, potassium chloride or 
Muria te of potash is a whi te or red cryst al cont aining 60 percent of p otassium oxide or K2O  it is 
completely soluble in water and therefore readily available to the crops it is not lost from the soil 
as it is absorbed on to the colloida l surface and it can be applied through (())(20:34)  sorry .  
Let us  discuss the potassium chl oride then, so potassium chloride or Muriate  of potash is a white 
or red crystal containing 60  percent of K2O  it is completely soluble in water and therefore 
readily available to the crop s, it is not lost from the so il as it is adsorbed on the colloidal su rface, 
it can be applied at sowing or before or after the sowing . The chlorine content is about 47  percent 
and potassium chloride is th e most common potassium source used. So, this is the  most common 
potassic fertil izer whi ch people use in their  field.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:39)  
 
Second is potassium sulfate , potassium sulfate is a white salt and content around 48 to 50  percent 
of K2O. I t is soluble in water and therefore readily available  to the crop, it does not pro duce an y 
acidity or alkalinity in the s oil, it is costly because it is made by treating potassium chloride with 
magnesium sulfate and potassium magnesium sulfate is a good so urce of potassium when there is 
a need for magnesium in a fertilizer program.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 22:13)  
 
Third one is p otassium nitrate. Now, to this potassium nitrate or KNO3  is a soluble source of two 
major essential plant nutrient. I t is commonly used , two major plant nutrient means potassium and nitrogen. So, it is  common ly used as a fertilizer for high value crops tha t benefit from nitrate 
nutrition and a source of potassium free of fluor ide. So, potassium nitrate used  in condi tions 
where a highly soluble chloride free nutr ient source i s needed and foliar  applicati on of p otassium 
during fruit development produce the ad vantages to the advantage to some crops. So, for foliar 
application, we apply this potassium nitrate now it is c ommonly used in greenhouse plant 
production and hydroponic  culture. Now, availability o f the p otassium nitrate is somewhat 
restricted because po tassium nitrate i s an explosive material. So,  it is not very commonly used as 
a potassic fertilizer.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:19)  
 
So, if you see the solubility of differe nt potassic fertilizers you c an see with increase in 
temperature, the solubility of po tassium nitrate is increased as compared to potassic muriate of  
potash and potassium sulfate. Ho wever, the solubility of potassi um sulfate is lowest among these  
potassium n itrate, potassium chloride an d potas sium sulfate these three potassic fertilizers .  (Refer Slide Time: 23:48)  
 
Now also potassium thiosulfate is used for fertigation or for folia r potassium application, it may 
be phytotoxic especially low soil moisture c onditions, and it is recommen ded to not apply these 
as a foliar application if tempe ratures are above 90 degree Fahre nheit and manure  is another 
source of potassium , the potassium content of manure  varies with animal type , feed ration 
stora ge and handling practices. So , apart  from these synthetic fertilizer manure  can be another 
source of  potassium in the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24: 28) 
 Also potassium magnesiu m sulfate it provides a readily available supply of potassium 
magnesium and sulphur to growing plants it is a lso kno wn as  langbeinite . So langbeinite  is a 
water soluble but dissolv e slow er than some other common potassic fertilizers because it i s 
particl es are denser than other potassium sources. So , it has a neutral pH and does not  contribute 
to soil acidity o r alkal inity. And this differ s from other a mong magnesium sources such as  
dolomite, which will increase soil pH and from elemental sulphur  or ammonium sulfate, wh ich 
will lower the soil pH . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:10)  
 
Now, ther e is a very important concept  of lux ury consumption, luxury consumption occurs when 
soil nutrient leve ls are above the optimum, and plants take up more of a nutrient th an needed for 
functioning and production and potassium is commonly taken up in excess. S o, here you can see 
in this g raph, t hese luxury consumption can be seen in in case of potassium.  
So, here there is a low available potassium in the soil and there is a  high available potassium in 
the soil. So, as the availability of the potassium is incre asing , you can see this is th e thres hold 
level of potassium requirement for optimum growth.  
However, as the availability of the potassium is increasing in this directi on, you can see plant can 
still uptake this potassium from the soil and this is known th is excess amount of consumpti on of 
potassium is known as luxury consumption. So, ultimately you can se e the plan do not need these 
portion of potassium for their optimu m growth howeve r, they continue to  uptake this potassium and that is known as the luxury  consumption. So, in case of potassi um we get these luxury 
consumption.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:28)  
 
Now, what are the consideration or potential mobilization . Now, pot assium is present in very 
small amount ranging from 0.04 to 3  percent. Despite  of being limited in limited amount 98  
percent  of these potassium is bound within the phyllosilicate s structure and the remaining 2  
percent exist in soil solution or exchange  site to become available for the plants.  
Hence, the soil fertility is decreased due to low  availability of this nutrien t. Many  
microorganisms in the soil are able to solubilize unavailable for ms of potassium bearing minerals 
such as Mica s, feldspar , illite a nd orthoclase by ex creting  organic acids which either directly 
dissol ves the rock potass ium or chelate  silicon ions t o bring  the potassium into the solution.  
So, we can see that the availab le portion is very small only 2  percent  which exist in the soil 
solution or exchangeable form and 98  percent  are present in unavailable forms and many 
microorganisms play an important  role f or making these potassium available from these 
unavailable forms.  (Refer Slide Time: 27:39)  
 
So, these are som e of the potassium mobilizers like,  Bacillus species and then Burkholderia and 
then Pseudomonas , rhizobium and so many Aspergillus,  so, rastoni a. So, they are different types 
of microorganisms which are known as potassium mobilize r in the soil because they help in 
converting  the unavailable forms of potassium to available forms of potassium.  
(Refer Slide Time:  28:07)  
 
So, guys, this m akes the end of this whole week of lectures. So, we have completed the week 3 
of lectures where we have discussed the phosphorus and  potassium, their importance phosphorus 
and potassium cycle , and also the major phosphat ic as well as potassic fertil izers, which you generally apply in the soil and their general characteristics. Hop efully, you have learned 
something new in th ese lectures , and we will discuss these  fertilizers and their application 
strategy in more detail in  our upcoming weeks. However,  let us  wrap up this week 3  here, and let 
us move to week 4 . Thank you very much.  
 
 