Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 16 
Soil Secondary Nutrients and Their Role in Plant Nutrition  
Welcome friends to this fourth week of NPTEL  Online Certification Course of Soil Fertility 
and Fertilizers . And in this week we are going to talk about Soil Secondary Nutrients and 
Their Role in Plant Nutrition . Today we are going to start lecture number 16 and in this 
lecture we are going t o cover the following topics .  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:43)  
 
First of all , we are going to cover the secondary nutrient and also we are going to cover the 
roles of calcium and let me just and also we are going to cover the sources and forms of 
calcium and ca lcium cycle . We are going to discuss ; we are going to see what are the calcium 
deficiency symptoms in plants ; and also what are the factors which controls the availability of 
calcium to the plants . And finally , some the control measures of calcium deficien cy and 
fertilizers .  
So these are some of the major concepts which we are going to cover . In our previous week 
we have already discussed the macronutrients . Among the macronutrients we have already 
discussed the primary nutrients or nitrogen phosphorus pot assium in details . We have also 
details their cycle , their availability , the major fertilizers , their nutrient content and different 
considerations while applying those fertilizer in the soil . We have discussed them .  Now today we are going to start discus sing the secondary nutrients . Now you know what are 
the secondary nutrients . There are three secondary nutrients ; one is calcium , magnesium and 
sulphur.  Now the secondary nutrients are also macronutrients . However , they required in less 
quantity than prima ry nutrients or NPK. S o first we are going to discuss calcium and then we 
are going to and then followed by magnesium . So in this lecture we are going to focus more 
on calcium and its source and also calcium cycle as well as calcium fertilizers .  
(Refer Sl ide Time: 2:55)  
 
So let us move  ahead  and see these are the keywords of this lecture , secondary nutrient , 
calcium cycle , synthesizers , calcium pectate and blossom end rot . So these are the some of 
the words which we are going to discuss in this lecture .  (Refer Slide Time: 3:10)  
 
Now as I have told you that the secondary nutrients , now there are three secondary nutrients ; 
the secondary nutrients are calcium , magnesium and sulphur a nd all three are known as the ; 
although they are macronutrients but they  require in relatively less quantity than nitrogen , 
phosphorus , potassium ; that is why they are called secondary nutrient .  
Now secondary nutrient requirement by crop is less than primary nutrient as I have already 
discussed . Secondary nutrient control maj or plant functions such as chlorophyll formation , 
protein synthesis , etcetera . So majority of the plant functions like chlorophyll formation , 
protein synthesis are governed ; and also cell division are governed by the secondary 
nutrients .  
So if you see the proportion of ; the presence or the concentration of the secondary nutrients 
on the earth crust we will see calcium present in 3.2 percent , whereas magnesium present in 
2.5 percent and sulphur present in 0.10 percent . So these are the proportion of nutrien t 
contained in the earth crust .  (Refer Slide Time: 4:34)  
 
So if we see the importance of calcium you can see that lime which has a chemical formula of 
calcium oxide , it contains calcium and this lime is applied to the soil to raise the soil p H. and 
sulphur compounds are used to lower the p H of the soil . We remember that irrigation water 
may contain on an average 25 ppm of sulphate and 50 ppm of calcium and 5 ppm of 
magnesium .  
When you talk about sulphate of course remember that these are ions , so calci um is 2 plus 
and magnesium is also 2 plus . So the sulphate  ion is present in 25 ppm in irrigation water and 
50 ppm , on an average 50 ppm in irrigation water , you can see calcium ion and you can see 
magnesium ion it is present on an average 5 ppm .  
Now seco ndary nutrients are also called synthesizers because of their function in the living 
organism . Because they are required for synthesis of different biomolecules that is why they 
are called synthesizers . So these are some of the important punch -points which  you should 
remember for secondary nutrient .  (Refer Slide Time: 5:58)  
 
Now if we now focus on calcium only remember calcium is a n secondary mineral that plays 
an important role in producing plant tissue . Because calcium is an important component of 
cell wall , so calcium is responsible for holding together the cell walls of the plants and 
calcium is a key nutrient for normal root system development . It is the fifth most abundant 
element in the earth crust . And as I have told you that it is an important c omponent for cell 
division .  
Because there is a form called calcium pectate , this calcium peptide compound forms the 
middle lamella of the cell and that is why for cell division calcium is indispensable . So that is 
why calcium is considered as one of the m ajor or macronutrient and essential nutrient for 
plant growth and metabolism .  (Refer Slide Time: 7:12)  
 
Now if you see the major roles of calcium in plant growth and metabolism , they are listed 
here. So first of all calcium helps convert nitrate nitrog en to form needed for protein 
formation . So this nitrate nitrogen is the source of protein which is taken up by the plant and 
ultimately the conversion of nitrate nitrogen to the protein will be mediated through calcium .  
Calcium is responsible for plant c ell division and for strengthening the cell wall , without the 
calcium the plant wall strength cannot be maintained and cell division is also dependent on 
the calcium . Calcium improves the absorption of other nutrients by roots and their 
translocation withi n the plants . Calcium activates a number of plant growth regulating 
enzyme system .  
And calcium contributes to improve disease resistance . So if you see more or less calcium is 
very much important for cell division and strengthening the cell wall and provi ding resistance 
to different types of disease and also the absorption of other elements to the roots and their 
translocation within the plant and regulate some of the enzymes which are required for the 
growth of the plant . So you can see that is why calciu m is considered as one of the most 
important essential element .  (Refer Slide Time: 8:56)  
 
Now what are the sources of calcium ? The major sources of calcium are weathered products 
of rocks and minerals . Now the weathering of the primary calcium bearing mineral depends 
upon the formation of protons in the soil . Of course , when there are this calcium bearing 
minerals which are present in the soil they must be weathered to supply the calcium and their 
weathering is dependent on some acidic condition .  
And this acidic condition is dependent on the production of protons or availability of the 
protons in the soil system . Now if we see the some of the major mineral which are considered 
as a source of calcium , so calcium calcite has a chemical formula of calcium carbonate and 
total percentage of calcium oxide is 56 percent .  
Apatite; we have already discussed apatite  in our last week and also it contains calcium oxide 
varying from 50 to 53 percent , 53.2 percent . Dolomite is basically calcium and magnesium 
carbonat e, so both calcium carbonate and magnesium carbonate and here the calcium oxide is 
around 33.2 percent whereas in case of gypsum which is calcium sulphate dihydrate is 
basically having 32.2 percent of calcium oxide .  
So all these are sources of calcium in the soil and generally we apply this calcium for 
different purpose . For example , calcite is or this limestone that is calcium carbonate and also 
dolomite is applied to the soil to raise the soil p H when the soil becomes acidic . So this 
calcite and dolomite  are required for reclaiming the acidic soil , whereas this calcium ion 
replaces the protons in the exchange complex of the soil , thereby raising the soil Ph.  On the other hand,  calcium sulphate dihydrate or gypsum is being used as a amendment to 
correct the alkalinity of the soil . So these are some of the important sources of calcium .  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:33 )  
 
Now if we see what are the forms of calcium in the soil , there are some mineral particles , 
calcium is mostly present as primary minerals such as  anorthite and basic rocks such as basalt 
and gabbro.  They all release calcium on weathering . So this anorthite  and then basal t, gabbro,  
all these release calcium during the weathering process .  
And also calcium carbonate or also calcite is very common min eral and the nodular , there are 
two form , one is nodular form of this the calcium carbonate or calcite and there is another 
form that is called amorphous form of calcium carbonate exist in the nature .  (Refer Slide Time: 12:29 )  
 
So if you see these are the nodular form of calcium , and however , these are amorphous 
calcium which you can see in the nature .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:42 )  
 
Among the other sources of calcium in the soil we can see simple salt , which is present 
commonly in the nature , which are c ommonly present in the nature like calcium chloride , 
calcium sulphate , calcium nitrate and calcium bicarbonate . So these are very common simple 
salts which we can see in nature .  And also exchangeable calcium is another form of calcium in soil . So remember  that of all 
the cations on the exchange complex of the soil calcium is the most dominant cation . So 
calcium also can occur as calcium ion in the exchange complex of the soil .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:26 )  
 
Now if we see the calcium cycle ; this is the calci um cycle and we can see that plants basically 
uptake both calcium and magnesium from the soil solution and also when this plant die , they 
can release this calcium and magnesium , which can further goes back to the soil solution . 
Also calcium can be removed from the soil by erosion process .  
And these both calcium and magnesium ion can precipitate in the form of calcium and 
magnesium minerals . The opposite of this precipitation , an opposite reaction of this 
precipitation is the dissolution where this calcium and magnesium minerals dissolve , so that 
this calcium and magnesium ion can come into the soil solution .  
And plant will uptake these two nutrients from there and also these calcium and magnesium 
minerals can weather to form these ; and ultimately due to th e weathering this calcium and 
magnesium ions can also attach to the exchange sides of the clay . So these a dsorbed 
magnesium as well as calcium can be dissolved from this exchange site of the soil and goes 
to the soil solution calcium and magnesium .  
Opposi te way from the soil solution this calcium and magnesium can be again served into the 
exchange complex of the soil and then they can be attached to the exchange side of the soil . 
So this is how the movement of this calcium and magnesium ions can be seen in  the soil and weathering takes a major role in the attachment or adsorption of these minerals . They are 
ions; of this calcium and magnesium in the exchange complex of the clay mineral .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:56 )  
 
Now what are the deficiency symptoms of c alcium in plant ? Now deformation and dying of 
tips or meristems , are also typically death of root tips are some of the major calcium 
deficiency symptoms . Also you can see necrotic leaf margin on young leaves or curling of the 
leaves when there is a calcium  deficiency .  
Stunted plant growth is another important symptom of calcium deficiency . Black spot on the 
leaves and fruits are also very much important symptom for calcium deficiency . In case of 
mild deficiency , a light green band appear along the margin o f the leaves of terminal buds.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:48 )  
 
So one of the major deficiency symptom for calcium deficiency is called the blossom end rot . 
Now in the blossom end rot symptoms occur on both green and ripe fruits . So it is identified 
by water soaked areas that gradually widen and mature into sunken brown leathery spot on 
the bottom end . And this blossom end ro t will not spread from plant to plant . So these are 
some of the pictures of blossom end ro t, in case of tomato we can see here .  
(Refer S lide Time: 17:37 )  
 
Also we can see here the tip burning and curling of leaf , you can see the tip of the leaves are 
burned and the leaves gets curled . And here you can see pale leaves and stunted or twisted growth you can see here . It is a pale color  of the leaves as well as the stunted or twisted 
growth of the leaves can be seen .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:01 )  
 
Also you can see cork  spot; these are the cork  spot on apple fruit and also you can see 
internal symptoms of cork  spot. So these black spots are kno wn as cork  spot on in the apples 
which is due to the calcium deficiency .  (Refer Slide Time: 18:23 )  
 
Also you can see here in the apple water  core is there , so this type of symptoms is known as 
water core which occurs due to calcium deficiency in apple .   
(Refer Slide Time: 18:33 )  
 
Also the other deficiency symptoms of calcium is called blackheart . So blackheart can be 
seen in case of celery . So basically what happens in the blackheart ? Its breakdown of young 
leaf tissues in the heart of the plant and so here you can see these are the blackhearts . So 
foliar spray of soluble calcium can be given directly to prevent this the blackheart symptom 
so due to calcium deficiency . So these are some of the symptoms of the blackheart .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:12 )   
Also in case of lettuce we can see tip burn . So many pinpoint necrotic areas along the margin , 
so you can see these are the necrotic areas along the margin and browning of the margins  of 
young maturing leaves in head and leaflet , leaf of the lettuce , so th ese are the some of the 
symptoms , stark symptoms of calcium deficiency .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:40 )  
 
Now what are the causes of calcium deficiency ? So one of the major cause , one of the major 
causes of calcium deficiencies if the root zone p H is too low o r too high . So if the root zone 
pH or pH of the rhizosphere becomes too less or too low or too high that can create the 
calcium deficiency symptoms . So the optimum p H for the growth of the plant is 6.5 to 7.5 .  And nutrient imbalance in growing medium is a nother reason for calcium deficiency . So 
when plants lack a particular nutrient they cannot create new cells , DNA  or other vital 
components . And also if we are applying excess nutrient that also can create nutrient toxicity . 
So nutrient imbalance can creat e the calcium deficiency .  
Over or under watering is another reason of calcium deficiency . So this is a common reason 
for unhealthy , wilting and dying plants . When calcium is absorbed , it becomes immovable 
and affects the younger leaves . So unlike the nitr ogen calcium within the plant is immobile 
and as a result we can see the deficiency symptoms in the younger leaves .  
Remember in case of nitrogen we saw the deficiency symptoms in the older leaves because 
nitrogen is mobile . So however , just opposite can b e seen in case of calcium , where 
deficiency symptoms can be seen in the younger leaves .  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:28 )  
 
Now what are the control measures of calcium deficiency ? So watering help in preventing the 
calcium deficiency injury , as when growing veg etables outdoor . And calcium deficiency can 
be avoided by using the recommended level of salinity for each crop and we can maintain the 
optimum soil moisture level . And we can also apply calcium spray to prevent the calcium 
deficiency disorder in the plant s.  
Mulching can be used to protect the plants again st calcium deficiency and addition of 
limestone can help in boosting the vegetable crop by increasing the alkalinity .  (Refer Slide Time: 22:16 )  
 
Now what are the factors which affects the calcium avail ability in the plant ? So you soil p H 
is the most important factor . Of course , usually soils with higher p H level contain more 
available calcium , so that is why calcium is considered as ; where there is a high concentration 
of calcium we can assume that the soil p H will be alkaline .  
Now another important factor is cation action capacity or CEC. G enerally higher CEC  
indicates a higher capacity of the soil to adsorb and hold calcium . Of course , when there will 
be high amount of negative charge due to either is omorphous substitution or p H dependent 
charge that can attract this positive charge cations .  
So higher CEC  will always tend for to adsorb high quantity of calcium . Presence of 
competing ions is another factor . So calcium compete with other , competes with other 
positively charged ions such as sodium , potassium , and magnesium . So applying too much of 
this positively charged ions decreases the calcium uptake by the plants .  
So sodium ions can replace the a dsorbed calcium and damage the soil structure and decr eases 
the calcium availability . So what happens ? When due to alkalinity the sodium ion can replace 
the calcium and thereby , dispersing the soil and destroying the soil structure and that can 
decrease the calcium availability .  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:04 )   
So let us see what are the calcium fertilizers . So calcium nitrate is one of the important 
calcium fertilizer . Generally , we can give it as foliar spray . So in case of foliar spray this 
method is best for remediating the blossom end rot , bitter pit and cor k spot . And 5 to 10 
grams of calcium nitrate per liter of water , we generally apply . And then for top dressing , top 
dressing means mixing of … In case of torque dressing we mix the calcium nitrate fertilizer 
with top soil .  
So what happens guys ? In case of , so there is a concept , one is basal t application another is 
top dressing . So bas al application generally are given , in case of any fertilizer bas al 
application are generally given before the planting and top dressing is the application of 
fertilizer in a standing crop . So when the crop is growing , whenever we apply the fertilizer 
that is known as top dressing .  
So calcium nitrate can be also applied as top dressing where we can mix the calcium nitrate 
with the top soil and 20 to 50 kg per acre as a basal t application also can be given at the time 
of sowing or at fast irrigation . So both as top dressing as well as basal application you can 
apply this calcium nitrate . What are the benefits ?  
First of all , it can , it prevents the problem before they arise . Secondly , it helps plant grow 
stronger . And thirdly , it allows plants to produce larger fruit .  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:44 )   
Second one is calcium carbonate or limestone . So limestone is a common sedimentary rock 
found in widespread geologic deposit . So limes tone raises the p H level of a neutral range 
beneficial to the plants , typically between 5.5 to 6.5 . So when there is a acidic soil we 
generally apply this lime stone so that we can raise the soil p H.  
And the optimum p H range for most of the nutrient uptak e is 5.5 to 6.5 and limestone raises 
the effectiveness of herbicides and limestone prevents the toxicities in the soil also and also 
aiding beneficial soil bacterial microbes can be achieved by calcium carbonate , which 
improves the health of the soil .  
Now how we can improve the health of the soil ? So basically this , when there is a complete 
dispersion or structural dispersion due to the , in the sodic soil the sodium ion from the 
exchange complex can be replaced by calcium and thereby , they improve the structure of the 
soil. And improve the soil health .  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:10 )   
So guys by this we wrapped , let us wrap up this lecture and I hope that you have gathered 
some of the important knowledges , which are related to calcium . And so if you have any 
questions please feel free to email me or post your question in the forum and I will be happy 
to answer your queries . These are some of the references , which I have followed .  
So you can take a look and consult these references for more comprehensive unders tanding of 
calcium and their role in plant nutrition . Thank you very much . 