Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 19 
Soil Secondary Nutrients and Their Role in Plant Nutrition (Cont.)  
Welcome friends to this 19th  lecture of  NPTEL  Online Certification Course of Soil Fertility and 
Fertilizers . In this week we are  discussing about Soil Secondary Nutrients and Their Role in 
Plant Nutrition . And in the previous three lectures we have discussed about two important 
secon dary nutrients  calcium and sulphur.   
We have discussed their cycles , also we have discussed their sources , their deficiency symptoms 
and how to correct those deficiency symptoms  using different types of fertilizers ; what are the 
sources of those elements a nd also we have discussed what are the factors which affect their 
availability to the plant .  
We have seen that due to the deficiency of those fertilizers , severe  deficiency can occur in the 
plant . So today we are going to discuss or start about  the plant metabolism . How it is dependent 
on magnesium , which is another important secondary nutrient . And how magnesium controls the 
plant growth ? What is the magnesium cycle and what are the sources of magnesium ? We are 
going to discuss .  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:42)  
 So let us start . So these are the concepts which we are going to cover . First of all , we are going to 
cover the functions of magnesium . We want to also discuss the magnesium cycle . And also next 
we want to discuss the sources and forms of magnesium . Then we are going to discuss the 
magnesium deficiency and uptake and finally , we are going to discuss the factors which affect 
the magnesium availability .  
So these are some of the concepts which we are going to cover . Magnesium functions as you 
know are very  much important . Magnesium cycle we want to discuss because to identify or 
understand how magnesium  is, generally occurs in the soil and how it  is present in the soil in 
different forms and also what are the equilibrium between these forms .  
And also sourc es and forms of magnesium we are going to discuss . And then magnesium 
deficiency in uptake we are going to discuss . And finally  those factors which you should 
remember are considered before  designing the corrective measures of magnesium deficiency . 
That me ans those factors which affect the magnesium availability we are also going to discuss .  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:08)  
 
These are some of the keywords for this lecture  - Magnesium cycle , chlorophyll photosynthesis , 
dolomite and interveinal  chlorosis . So these  are some of the  some of keywords which we are 
going to discuss .  (Refer Slide Time: 3:28)  
 
So magnesium - Magnesium which is denoted by Mg is essential constituent of chlorophyll 
implants . So it is a structural component of chlorophyll . And this sugges ts that it has tremendous 
role in the photosynthesis process . Because photosynthesis of the plant is dependent on the 
chlorophyll content . Without chlorophyll plant cannot  complete its photosynthesis .  
Now this  can be easily implied that without photosynth esis plant cannot survive , so that is why 
magnesium takes part an important role for  plant growth . Magnesium is absorbed by plant  from 
the soil or plant roots uptake these nutrients as Mg2 plus form. I t about 2 percent of the earth 
crust ranging from 0.1 percent in  coarse sandy soils of humid region to 4 percent of fine textured 
soils of arid and semi -arid region .  
Of course , in arid and semi -arid region you will see the higher content of calcium and 
magnesium . So, but in case of humid region you will see t hat the concentration of these  calcium 
and magnesium  goes down . So magnesium also helps to activate specific enzyme systems . So 
just like other essential elements it also helps in activating the specific enzyme systems .  (Refer Slide Time: 5:18)  
 
So if you see the structure of magnesium , we can see that magnesium is the central position , this 
cation which is surrounded by 4 pyrrole ring . So you can see this is a pyrrole , which is composed 
of four carbon atom and one nitrogen atom . So this four pyrrole  ring is surrounding with  a single 
magnesium atom and ultimately it is forming this chlorophyll molecule . So heart of each 
molecule of chlorophyll is an atom of magnesium . So that is why without the presence of 
magnesium we cannot think of photosynthesis proc ess.  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:04)  
 Now if we want to see the major functions of magnesium we can see that it improves the phloem  
loading and sucrose transport from source to sink tissues . Secondly it helps in vigorous root 
growth and improving the root to s hoot ratio . So root growth is very much important and for root 
growth it is important that there should be adequate magnesium supply to the plant .  
It also supports photosynthesis related process like transpiration rate , stomatal conductance , 
carbon dioxid e fixation and linear photosynthetic electron transport ; so all these are very much 
important for photosynthesis and they are controlled by this magnesium availability . Since it is a 
structural component of the chlorophyll .  
So also  it is clearly implied t hat magnesium is required for optimal chlorophyll biosynthesis . So 
without the presence of this magnesium chlorophyll biosynthesis will be severely hampered . It 
also facilitates the activities of magnesium dependent enzymes . There are almost 300 magnesium 
dependent enzymes in the plant body .  
So without the presence of magnesium their activities are hampered , which ultimately  impacts 
the growth of the planets . So we can see these are the major  functions of magnesium within the 
plant so that is why plant can not survive if magnesium is not present in the soil .  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:52)  
 
Now if you see this is the magnesium cycle . Now in the magnesium cycle you see there are 
different phases . So of course , the magnesium can be removed by crop harvest , so it i s a example of loss of magnesium . However , the input of magnesium can be achieved by mineral and organic 
fertilizers . So when we add this mineral organic fertilizer these magnesium ions get attached to 
the exchangeable positions of the clay minerals and fr om there it becomes available to the soil 
solution . From the soil solution plants uptake this magnesium .  
So also the decomposition of the crop residues can add this organic matter and this organic 
matter is in equilibrium with this soil solution for suppl ying these magnesium ions . Some of this 
magnesium ion gets leached away and some of these magnesium ions can form these non-
exchangeable  magnesium .  
Those non-exchangeable  magnesiums are structurally integrated  magnesium  atoms . So these 
structurally integr ated non-exchangeable  magnesium can be also , we can see in case of different 
types of secondary minerals and the secondary minerals generally are coming from the 
weathering of the primary minerals . So this is how this  magnesium can move in different phases  
within the soil and there it equilibrium with the magnesium in the soil solution .  
Also magnesium can be lost by erosion  from the soil . So these are some of the ways through 
which this magnesium cycle operates in the soil .  
(Refer Slide Time: 9:45)  
 
Now what are the sources of magnesium ? So these are some of the minerals which are the 
general sources of magnesium like dolomitic  limestone that is calcium carbonate plus magnesium carbonate and it contains 8 to 20 percent of magnesium . Epsom salts which is 
magnesium sulphate hepta hydrate , which contain 10 percent magnesium .  
Kieserite which is magnesium sulfate monohydrate contains 18 percent of magnesium . And 
potassium magnesium sulphate contains 11 percent of magnesium . So these are the common 
sources of magnesium .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:30 )  
 
Now we have discussed in the magnesium cycle that there are different forms , so let us discuss 
those different forms . First of all , magnesium in soil solution . So this magnesium in the soil 
solution is in equilibriu m with the exchangeable magnesium and is readily available for the 
plant . So whatever plant root uptake , whatever magnesium is up taken by the plant root they are 
coming from the soil solution .  
They  are available as Mg2 plus ion in the soil solution . Exchangeable magnesium - So this 
fraction consists of magnesium held by clay particles and organic matter . So this exchangeable 
magnesium is held by the clay particles and organic matter . In the exchangeable sites , due to the 
cation exchange capacity .  
Now non-exchangeable magnesium  consists of magnesium which is the constituent , the 
structural constituents of primary minerals in the soil . We have discussed it; we have seen in the 
in the magnesium cycle that the magnesium ca n also comes from the primary mineral s due to the process of weathering . However , the breakdown process or the weathering process in soil is 
very, very slow and this fraction is thus not readily available to the plants .  
Another non-exchangeable  magnesium is there which comes from the octahed ral clay layers as 
well as the inter layer material . So in our , if you have gone through my Soil Science Technology 
lectures where we have discussed about  the structure of the clay minerals . We have seen that 
there are two types of structure , one is  di-octahedral structure as well as tri -octahedral structure .  
In case of tri -octahedral structure , out of the three octahedral positions are filled by magnesium . 
However , in the di-octahedral  orientation two of the three octahedral positions are filled by 
alumin um ions. So in the tri -octahedral structure this magnesium appears as a structural 
component . And thus , it is non-exchangeable . It cannot be  utilized by the plants , so this is in the 
non-exchangeable  form .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:01 )  
 
So you can see these  are the forms of magnesium . We can clearly see . So these are the , this is the 
magnesium in the soil solution , which is freely moving in the soil solution . These are the 
exchangeable magnesium , which are attached to the exchangeable sides of the clay . However, 
these is the non-exchangeable  magnesium , which is a structural component forming the 
octahedral  sheet like structure .  So this is non -exchangeable magnesium . So also , this picture also shows this magnesium , 
potassium , calcium , these are in soil soluti on and  due to the format … due to the CAC or Cation 
Action Capacity that are being formed , these ions are attached to the surface of the clay minerals . 
Also if you can remember we are seeing here in the octahedral sheet isomorphous substitution 
where one al uminum is replaced by magnesium .  
Now we know that aluminum is 3 plus which is replaced by magnesium 2 plus, so when there is 
replacement of 3 plus with 2 plus there will be formation of negative charge and this negative 
charge is satisfied by these positi vely charged cations in the exchange sites , so that is why this 
distribution can be seen .  
Either magnesium could be a  structural component of the whole octahedral sheet forming a tri -
octahedral structure or in this di-octahedral  structure also aluminum ca n be replaced by 
magnesium due to the isomorphous substitution and ultimately creating negative charge which 
will attract this positively charged cations of which magnesium is there and sodium calcium 
there, potassium there , so they are getting attached .  
And also the some of them are also in the soil solution , so we can understand that due to this 
isomorphous substitution CEC develops and CEC helps in attaching these mineral or this 
positively charged cations and some of the cations are in the soil solutio n. So the distribution of 
different forms can be clearly seen and that with the reason of their distribution .  (Refer Slide Time: 15:28 )  
 
Now also we can clearly see here  forms of magnesium in another  perspective . So here we can 
see that magnesium in th e structural form consist about 90 to 98 percent . So magnesium is 
slowly exchangeable in the acid soluble form and also magnesium is rapidly exchangeable form 
magnesium in soil solution .  
So the exchangeable sides , the magnesium which are attached to the e xchangeable sides can be 
in equilibrium with the magnesium and the solution and from where magnesium is uptaken by 
the plant . From these magnesium in the soil solution magnesium can be lost by leaching and also 
root exudates and soil microorganisms affect the magnesium release .  
So this plant magnesium uptake depends on this magnesium in the soil solution and magnesium 
in the soil solution is in equilibrium with the exchangeable magnesium . However , non-
exchangeable  magnesium or structural magnesium are not readily available to the plants . And 
their conversion is also very slow . (Refer Slide Time: 16:38 )  
 
Now let us see  and let us discuss about magnesium uptake . Now we know that plant takes 
magnesium in its ionic form that is Mg2 plus and magnesium uptake is dominated by two 
processes , one is passive uptake , which is driven by transpiration stream , another is diffusion , 
where magnesium ion moves from zone of high concentration to zone of low concentration  along 
the concentration gradient , we know that .  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:05 )  
 So the loss of a healthy  green color is the most , in the first indication of also magnesium 
deficiency . So now we are discussing the deficiency symptoms . We can see since magnesium is 
a component of chlorophyll magnesium deficienc y will also affect the chlorophyll synthesis and 
as a result there will be loss of this healthy green color .  
So this is the first indication of magnesium deficiency . Magnesium is also highly mobile in the 
plant and deficiency symptoms first appear on the lower leaves . And the magnesium deficient 
plant usually have less than 0.1 percent magnesium and deficiency is common in the plants 
grown on coarse texture acidic soil .  
Because of course , in case of acidic soil we cannot see high concentration of calcium 
magnesium . They are mostly present in  in alkaline condition . And we can also see interve inal 
chlorosis in case of magnesium deficiency . Yellowish  of tissue along  with the leaf margin and 
between the veins we can , yellowish patches of tissues along with the  leaf margins and between 
the veins we can see .  
Reddening of the older leaves and middle leaves are also important  deficiency symptoms . And 
also magnesium deficiency , in case of magnesium deficiency the proportion of protein nitrogen 
decreases and that of  non-protein  nitrogen increases . So these are some of the magnesium 
deficiency symptoms .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:47 )  
 So these are some of the pictures showing the magnesium deficiency , you can see it is a low 
magnesium , so it is showing interveinal  chlor osis and here adequate magnesium , so no 
interveinal  chlorosis .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:57 )  
 
Also here you can see different stages of magnesium deficiency , so this is an early stage of 
magnesium deficiency . As the stage progresses we can see the yellowing  is progressing . So more 
interveinal chlorosis we can see at the later stage of magnesium deficiency .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:13 )  
 Here we can see internal chlorosis in case of  magnesium deficiency in potato and magnesium 
deficiency in cotton we can see h ere.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:24 )  
 
This is the magnesium deficiency in tomato and here you can see magnesium deficiency in corn .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:31 )  
 
So if you want to see the physiological impacts of magnesium deficiency in plants , so we can see 
there are different types of implication . First of all , when there is a magnesium deficiency that affects the photosynthesis , because this disturbs the photosynthetic electron transport . Due to this 
magnesium deficiency and which affects the photosynthesis  and reduce the chlorophyll 
biosynthesis , it is the first thing .  
Second is it affects the oxidant enzymes and this oxidative cellular  damage can occurs and 
ultimately there is oxidative DNA damage , protein oxidative damage and lipid peroxidation 
reaction can occur . Also it can impair the phloem  loading , which can  impact the carbohydrate 
allocation , which inhibits the sucrose transport from source to sink tissues . Also magnesium 
deficiency can alter root anatomy and physiology .  
So ultimately which leads to  reduced magnesium uptake and compact root growth and also they 
can produce excess or low accumulation of some nutrients . And they can disturb iron  hemostasis 
in soil . So ultimately from this reduced chlorophyll biosynthesis oxidative DNA damage , protein 
oxidative damage lipid peroxidation reaction .   
Then inhibition of sucrose transport from source  to sink tissues , compactness of root growth and 
then disturbed iron hemostasis in cell ; ultimately leads to chlorotic leaves , reduce root to shoot 
ratio and stu nted plant growth . So all these comes , all these  affect these  plant in this fashion 
where we can see chlorotic leaves , reduce root to shoot ratio , because root growth is severely 
hampered and also stunted plant growth . So these are some of the ways to whic h the magnesium 
deficiency affect the plants .  (Refer Slide Time: 21:34 )  
 
So magnesium losses from soil . The major loss we can see in case of crop uptake or crop 
removal , leaching also beyond the root zone is another important  ways  through which 
magnesi um gets lost from the soil . So leaching losses of magnesium show high variability , which 
is dependent on the nature of the soil .  
The amount of percolating rainfall or irrigation water , kind and quantity of fertilizer used and 
level of exchange of magnesiu m also magnesium loss from depends on  erosion of topsoil and 
also fixation into unavailable forms . So these are some of the , these are some of the ways which 
magnesium  gets lost from the soil .  (Refer Slide Time: 22:20 )  
 
Also there are some factors whic h affect the magnesium availability . First of all , low 
temperature , dry soil condition , high level of competing elements and effect of soil pH, these are 
all important factors which affects the magnesium availability . Now in low p H soil the solubility 
of m agnesium decreases , manganese and aluminum  became more soluble and reduce the 
magnesium uptake .  
So acidic soil increases the tendency of magnesium to leach , because they have lower CEC.  So 
these are some of the reasons where we can see this magnesium defi ciency in case of low p H 
acidic soils . (Refer Slide Time: 23:00 )  
 
Excessive application of potassium and ammonium also impacts the magnesium availability , 
because calcium magnesium ratio should not be greater than 7 is to 1 and potassium magnesium 
ratios is less than 5 is to 1 in field crops and 3 is to 1 for vegetables and 2 is to 1 for green house 
crops . So addition through fertilizer , manures and rains also impacting the magnesium 
availability , because farmyard manure and oil cakes are rich source of magnesium .  
Basic slag contains 3 to 4 percent of magnesium and serpentine contains 26 percent of 
magnesium . So these are some of the factors which affect the magnesium availability .  (Refer Slide Time: 23:42 )  
 
So guys let us wrap up this lecture and th ese are some of the references which I have consulted 
for this  lecture . Please go through these  and these different sources to gather more 
comprehensive idea about magnesium . And I hope those will be helpful for your better 
understanding of magnesium and t heir impact on plant growth and metabolism . So let us wrap up 
this lecture and let us meet in our next lecture . Thank you . 