Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agri cultur al and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Week 3  
Lecture  12 
Soil P and K Plant Nutrition  (Contd .) 
Welcome friends to t his lecture 12 of NPTEL onl ine certification course of soil fertility and 
fertilizers. And we are at week 3 and in this week, we are talking about soil phosphorus and 
potassium for plant nutrition.   
So, in our previous lecture of this week, we have discusse d about soil phosphorus an d their 
origin , and what are the  forms of soil phosphorus  in soil like organic forms, then in organic 
forms, what does , what are the other, what are the important organic forms of soil 
phosphorus , and what are the combined  forms of inorganic soil phosphorus , what are the ions 
which are present in soil and what are the important soil phosphorus ions, which plant can 
uptake , we have discussed about the primary orthophosphate  ions,  secondary orthophosphate 
ions.  
We have discussed  about the phosphorus cycle in soil. We have seen, how phosphorus can 
move from organic pool to inorganic pool , and from there it can either adsorbed, or 
precipitate in other forms . They can precipitate in secondary forms and can produce different 
types of minera ls like calcium phosphat e, they can also precipitate in the forms of aluminium 
phosphate , iron phosphate, they can adsorbed onto the surface of the clay minerals, or iron 
aluminium oxides.  
And, these iron , these primary, and secondary orthophosphate i on can als o originated from 
the weathering of appetite minerals, we have discussed about the appetite minerals, they are 
the major source of these phosphate ions in the soil. And, we have also discussed the iron, 
and aluminium bond  forms, and calcium bond  forms of ph osphate.  (Refer  Slide Time: 2:35) 
 
So, in this lecture, we are going to discuss these important concepts . We are going to discuss 
the phosphorus deficiency symptoms in plants, we are going to discuss about phosphorus 
availability to the plant , and then ph osphorus mobili zation in the soil . And also, we are going 
to discuss how phosphorus can be lost from the soil.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 2:35) 
 
So, these are some of the key words of this lecture like phosphorus deficiency, phosphorus 
placement, free phosphorus , phosphorus mo bilization, and phosphorus leaching. So, these are 
some of the key words of this lecture.  (Refer Sli de Time: 3:11) 
 
So, let us start . So, at first, we should understand what are the major deficiency symptoms of 
phosphorus in plan ts. Now, w e have discuss ed that plants get their energy from the 
phosphorus, and phosphorus is declared for their growth because they help in the formation 
of new tissue.  
So, many of the symptoms of phosphorus deficiency, we can see visually  by the stunted  
growth of  the plant, b ut at the same time we should be very -very cautious, because many of 
the symptoms of phosphorus deficiency can be confused with nitrogen deficiency , and zinc 
deficiency. Now, how? Because similar to nitrogen , phosphorus deficiency may cause 
prem ature leaf fall and purple  or red anthocyanin pigmentation.  
So, in case of nitrogen you will also we have seen that there is a premature leaf fall , and 
purple, or red anthocyanin mutations is the , in case of phosphorus also we can see that. Plant  
lacking ph osphorus , may develop dead necrotic areas on leaves, petiole s, and fruit . And 
plants may have a general overall stunted appearance , and leaves may have a characteristic 
dark to  blue-green coloration. So, these are the major symptoms of phosphoru s def iciency in  
plant.  (Refer Sli de Time: 5:11) 
   
 
So, if you can see some of these , you can clearly see here in this picture, that this is 
phosphorus deficiency in rapeseed plant . We can see there is a clear red leaf, which shows the 
phosphorus redness  in these  edges of  this leaf, which can show the phosphorus deficiency. 
Also, you can see this is the phosphorus deficiency in tomato plant, you can clearly see this 
redness in the leaf edges. So, these is one of the major deficiencies in terms of the phos phorus 
deficiency in plant.     
So, because of high mobility of phosphorus in plant , and tendency of younger leaves to 
deplete older leaves of mobile nutrients under  deficiency conditions, older leaves are usually 
first to exhi bit deficiency  symptoms.  Just like in case of nitrogen,  we have seen in case of 
phosphorus also the, we can see the deficiency symptoms appearing in the older leaves , first appearing in the older leaves . Because phosphorus is highly mobile in plant and so,  that is 
why t he deficie ncy symptoms can be fir st seen in case of  older leaves . Like zinc , phosphorus 
deficiency may also cause distortion in the shape of the leaves of some plants. And, 
deficiency of phosphorus causes an accumulation of carbohydrates.  
So, if yo u can see if you can  go back to the prev ious slide, we can see, you can see clearly 
some deformation of the leaf shape. So, this is another important symptom of phosphorus 
deficiency in the plant, which can be easily confused w ith zinc deficiency be cause, in case of 
zinc deficiency also, there w ill be some distortion in the shape of the leaves.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 7:38) 
 
Here, you can see the phosphorus deficiency symptom in case of tomato, we can c learly se e 
reddish, red coloration of the leaves . And here, you can see phosphorus deficiency sympt oms 
apart from this redness in the leaves , we can see their stunted growth. So,  this is one of the 
most important deficiency symptoms of phosphorus in plant.  (Refer Sli de Time: 8:11) 
 
Now, what are the cause s of phosphorus deficiency ? There are certain c auses of phosphorus 
deficiency . First of all , cold weather is easy one of the maj or factor of phosphorus deficiency, 
excessive rainfall is another important as t he cause  of phosphorus deficiency , acidic soil c an 
cause phosphorus deficiency because in case of acidic soil, phosphorus will be precipitated in 
iron phosphate, or aluminium p hosphate , and thus become unavailable to the plant.  
Soil compaction is an another  importan t factor of phosphorus deficiency, inj ury from 
herbicide can cause phosphorus defici ency , pressure from different insects and also cause 
phosphorus deficiency , and fi nally  poor soil health. The soil which is devoid of organic 
matter can also cau se phosph orus deficiency .  
Because organic matter , the presence of organic matter can improve t he phosphorus 
mobilization , or I would say the dissolution of adsorbed phosphorus can  be mediated by the 
presence of organic matter , and that is why if the soil healt h is poor  that means, the organic 
matter con tent is poor that can also cause phosphorus de ficiency.  (Refer Sli de Time: 9:50) 
 
Now, phosphorus also get lost from the soil t hrough  different process just like nitrogen. One 
of them is surface runoff . So, here you can see  that surface phosphorus  runoff incre ases for 
soils that have greater slope . Of course, here you can see the greater slope will have higher 
runoff , and when soil tests h igh in phosphorus it usually results in high dissolved phosphorus 
concentration in runoff  water.  
So, when there is a surface  runoff that can , the phosphorus can ea sily move from soil to the 
groundwater , and can create different types of problems just like eu trophication. So, they can 
go to the water bodies and create eutrophication and phosphoru s can also go to the 
groundwater a lso. So, the surface runoff is one of the major processes through which 
phosphorus gets lost from the soil .  (Refer Sli de Time: 11:02) 
 
Another  important process  is leaching process. So, you know that leaching is a downward 
movement of wate r along a  soil profile.  So, as the dissolved phospho rous moves down the 
soil profile, the sub soil acts as a filter and , can tightly retain phosphorus this process slows 
phospho rus from moving deeper into the soil. So, here you can see , when there is a move 
when the phosphorus m oves down to the soil profile , the soil profile acts as a barrier or filter 
that can tightly retain this phosphorus and ultimately, this  process slows phosphorus from 
moving deeper into the site. So, this is another important  process of phosphorus loss.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 11:54) 
 
Subsurface phosphorus  loss occurs when phosphorus dissolved in percolating water , travels 
horizontally below the soil surface, but above the  water table through lateral flow process. So, here in this picture, you can cle arly see that, here the phosphorus is moving in percolating 
water , this is a you can see percolating water horizontally below the soil surface, but above 
the water table, so, what a table is here, so, above the water table, but below t he soil s urface 
through latera l flow process.  
So, here you  can see through lateral flow process these phosphorus get moved from the soil 
to the water bodies . And tile drainage a nd d itch drainage at the examples of a subsurface 
phosphorus loss source . So, the s ubsurface  phosphorus l oss generally occurs when there is a 
tile drainage and ditch networks are there. So, this is another way through which the 
phosphorus get genera lly lost from the soil apart from leaching and surface runoff.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 13:10) 
 
Now, if we see t he availa bility of the soil phosphoru s. Phosphorus enhances root growth, 
flowering , seed formation and seed maturation . And phosphorus availability is controlled by 
soil organic m atter levels , soil pH, soil aluminium and iron contents . Of course, when there is 
a high co ntent of soil aluminium  and iron, especially in acidic soil that will enhance the 
phosphorus precipitation in the forms of iron and aluminium phosphate. However, when the 
pH of the soil goes towards neutral, then phosphorus availability i ncreases.  Additionally, 
when there is org anic matter, that can also improve the dissolution of adsorbed phosphorus 
and thereby improving their availability to the plan t.  
Apart f rom that other factors such as fertilizer placement can significantly impact pho sphorus 
availability during the growing  season. Since phosphorus , when you apply the phosphorus 
into the soil, most of it gets bond  to the soil solid phases , and thus become unavailable. So, phosphorus placement in the soil during the growth of the  plant is  a very im portant 
consideration. So, w e are going to discuss this also in our upcoming slides.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 14:49) 
 
So, phosphorus availability in soils that are acidic in nature can be restricted by iron , and 
aluminium  oxides  found naturally within the soil . So, we h ave already seen t hat when there is 
an iron and  aluminium  oxides in the soil that can produc e, that can precipitate that first 
phosphorus from the soil solutio n, the primary orthophosphate and , primary orthophosphate  
ions.  
So, that crea tes the p hosphorus deficiency in the soil. Iron aluminium  oxides are the key 
components of phosphorus fixation in acidic soil . Of course, as we know that when in acidic 
soil, of course, are also in alkaline soi l also, phosphorus get fixed in calcium phosphate . In 
acidic soil they get fixed in , phosphorus gets fixed in as iron phosphate , or aluminium  
phosphate .  
Fixation refers to the binding of phosphorus to iron and aluminiu m oxides through strong 
chemical bond resulting in reduced free phosphorus withi n this so lution. Remember, 
whatever phos phorus uptake in a plant uptake phosphorus  from the soil solution that depends 
on those two major ions , as we have discu ssed primary orthophosphate ion, and secondary 
orthophosphate  ion.  
When these two maj or forms get fixed by pho sphorus by iron and alumi nium, the ir 
concentration in the soil solution is depleted . And as a result, there will be a deficiency and plant cannot fur ther uptake these ions from the soil solution because there will be less free 
phosphorus , available phospho rus iron in the soil solu tion.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 16:53) 
 
 
So, that is why the pH plays an very , very important role in the overall phosphorus 
availability , pH is the major control ling factor of phosphorus availability in the plant. So, you 
can see her e clearl y in the y axis, t here is phosphorus availability , and in the x axis the re is 
soil pH . Phosphorus precipitates as iron , and aluminium phosphate when the pH up to 5. And 
when the pH goes  towards neutral that is from 5.5 to 6.8 in this zone ph osphor us is mostly 
available , and again when the pH goes beyond 7, then phosphorus precipitates as calcium 
phosphates and then become have again unavailable to the plant.  So, optimum pH r ange where phosphorus is available to the plant lies in between 5.5 to 6.8 , 
where the conce ntration o f both ions , primary orthophosphate  ion, and secondary 
orthophosphate  ion are at eq uilibrium. T hey are at equilibrium , and plant can uptake these 
ions in op timum quantity.  
So, here you can see that plant roots take phosphorus in the for ms of HP 04 2 minus,  H2PO4  
minus in soils with pH greater than 7.2. The HP04 2 minus  form is predominan t. In soils with 
pH between 5 and 7.2 the H2PO4  ion predomina tes. So, the pH basically controls the 
phosphorus availa bility by  controlling the prec ipitation of phosphorus ei ther in the form of 
iron, and aluminium phosphates , or calcium phosphates.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 19:29) 
 
So, we can also see here there is another gr aphical representation , you can see extent of 
phosphate retention in the y axis a nd pH in the x axis. So, yo u can see here when the pH is 
from  up to this range around in the acidic condition. So, the insoluble phosphates of iron , 
aluminium  adsorption to oxides and clay. So, that means exten t of phosphate retention is  
quite hi gh, when th ere is low pH and of cours e, when there is a high pH in soluble calcium 
phosphates retention is also phosphorus retention is also high.  
So, here pH  6.5 for optimum availability. So, if we have to pin down a particular pH for 
optimum avai lability that would be around pH 6.5, where t he availability or the phosphate 
retention is minimum. So, that shows the importance of controlling the pH for phosphorus 
availabil ity to the plant . (Refer Sli de Time: 20:47) 
 
Also, you can see influence of pH in different forms of phosphor us. Here in the x axis, there 
is a pH , and in the y axis the distribution ratio you can see . At pH around neutral both H2PO 4 
and HPO4  2 minus are present in equili brium. However, when we move towards higher pH 
in an alkaline condition, H2PO 4 2 minus predominance and in the acidic condition H2PO4 
minus predominates. So, the distribution of these available ions also is governed by the pH of 
the soil sy stem.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 21:39) 
 
Now, what is the effect of fertilizer placement on phosphorus a vailability ? Since ph osph orus 
is quite immobile within the soil profile, fertilizer placement close to the seed that is through 
banding can increase its availability to the crop. So, inste ad of broadcasting the phosphatic fertilizer, if we place th e phosph atic fertilizer in a band  around the close to the seed that can 
increase the availability of phosphorus to the crop .  
Otherwise, if we apply t hrough  broadcasting tha t will enhance the phosphorus fixation , and 
most of the phosphorus will be unavai lable to the plant . Placement outsi de of the root zone 
such as broadcast decreases efficient use of phosphorus unless root grow extensively out to 
where it has been placed.  
So, in most of the cases, we generally do not recommend broadcasting of phosphati c fertili zer 
to prevent its loss by precipitation  in the form of either calcium phosphate , or iron , or 
aluminium phosphate. Ensuring phosphorus  is placed close to the ro ot while avoiding seed 
burn is also necessary to enhance phosphorus availability  to the c rop throug hout the season. 
So, we also should ensure that phosphorus is not creating the seed burn. So that phosphorus 
placement can  be negatively impact the phosphorus availability  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:47 ) 
 
What is the effect of organic  matter o n phosphorus availability ? Over the time t he phosphorus 
that attach to the organic matter can be displaced by organic anions from the soil solution, 
effectively increas ing phosphorus availability to the plant fruits for uptake. So, whatever 
phospha te or pho sphorus ions which are attached to the or ganic matter, when they are 
displaced by competing organic anions they come to the soil solution , and becomes available 
for the  plant to uptake.  
Secondly, organic matter can also coat and interfere with the phosphoru s binding sit e, making 
phosphorous  more  available for uptake by plant roots. So, that is why when we apply the organic matter that can coat , that can create a coat arou nd the adsorption site and that can 
interfere with the absorption of phosphorus and ultim ately increases their availability.  
Phosp horus that is already tied up within the , within soil organic matter can mineralize 
throughout this season , and will act as a so urce of phosphorus available for crop uptake. So, 
phosphorus  which is present in organi c form, that is organic form of phosp horus  can 
mineralize throughout the season and they can produce the phosphorus which , they can 
produce the inorganic phosphorus for  crop uptake.  
So, this is how organic matter can positively i nfluence the phosphorus availability. So, the 
two major factors  that i nfluence the phosphorus  availability to the crop , are pH as well as the 
organic matter presence, you re member that the pH should be near to neutral to enhance the 
phosphorus availabil ity by re ducing the phosphorus fixation , at the same time there sh ould be  
high amount of organic matter that can displace the bond  phosphorus ions and also they can 
prevent far ther binding phosphorus  by creating an interfering layer , and also increase the  
phosphat e ion concentration in the salt solution by mineralization  of org anic forms of 
phosphorus.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 26:25) 
 
Phosphorus mobilisation , microbes play a fundamental role in mobilizing the o rganic , native 
or inherited phosphorus that unavailable for plants. The total p hosphorus  acquired by plant 
through ba cteria and fungus is about 75 percent , biochemical process operating in the 
rhizosphere determined the mobilization and acquisition of soil  nutrient , there are many 
biochemical processes which are going on in the rhizosp here which are governed by this 
microorgani sm that also determines the acquisition of soil nutrients by the plant root .  Wide variety of bacteria, fungi , and endophytes solub ilize in soluble phosphorus through the 
production of organic acids, a feature w hich is g enetically controlled. So, thi s phosph orus 
mobilization is also governed by these different types of microbes and other biochemical 
process.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 27:20) 
 
So, if you see the phosphorus  mobilization mechanism and microorganisms, we can see 
organic phosphorus m obilizati on can be achieved by direct way , or indirect way . In the direct 
way, we can , it can be achieved by lowering pH , and also hydrolysing  the organic forms of 
phosph orus. And in indirectly , that can be achieved by release of carbon dioxid e, and rel ease 
of protons . So, these  are some of the microorganism  which take part in phosphorus 
mobilization in the soil , and this is how phosphorus  mobilize in the  soil, and mediate which 
is, mediated by different microbes which are present in t he soil.  (Refer Sli de Time: 28:11) 
 
So, guys , we have discussed  some of the important concepts of phosphorus availability, we 
have seen how phosphorus is move generally , how phosph orus moves from soil to different 
other phases, they can be e ither ads orbed , or they can precipitate . And how the different 
factors can control the phosphorus availability in the soil we  have discussed . And how the 
phosphorus can be lo st from the soil , we have also discussed through different types of 
leaching, su rface run off and subsurface runoff.  
These are s ome of the references which might be helpful for you to consult , to get a more 
comprehensive idea about this phosphorus mobilizati on. We are going to wrap up this lecture 
here, and we  will start from here in our next lect ure, and we are going to discuss mo re about 
other , more about phosphorus and potassium. Thank you very much.  