Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 18 
Soil Secondary Nutrients and Their Role in Plant Nutrition (Cont.)  
Welcome friends to this  lecture number 18 of NPTEL  Online Certification Course of Soil 
Fertility and Fertilizers . And we are at week 4 where we are discussing Soil Secondary Nutrients 
and Their Role in Plant Nutrition . In our past  lecture 16 and 17 we have discussed about the 
calcium  and we have also started discussing about sulphur .  
In the lecture 16 we have discussed about  calcium and importance of calcium for plant nutrition , 
what are the different calcium sources and also what are the calcium  deficiencies in the plants 
like bloss om end rot , then cork spot, we have also discussed . In our previous lecture we have 
started discussing about sulphur  and sulphur  is also very important secondary nutrient .  
And it is required for the protein synthesis because it is a component of different  essential amino 
acids like cysteine , cystin e and methionine . So these sulphur  compounds , organic compounds are 
essential for the growth and growth of the plants . Now sulphur is available to the plants in the 
form of sulphate , which is SO42 minus and we ha ve also seen different types of sources of 
sulphur  minerals like we have discussed about pyrites . We have discussed about galena and so 
on. So today in this lecture we are going to  start from there .  (Refer Slide Time: 2:06)  
 
And these are the concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture . First of all , sulphur 
fertilizer , their factors  affecting  sulphur availability and also nitrogen to sulphur  ratio and also 
what are the deficiency symptoms of sulphur .  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:21)  
 
So these are t he keywords for this lecture  like NS ratio, ammonium sulphate , then gypsum , then 
sulphur  metabolism , chlorosis , these are some of the important  keywords which we are going to 
discuss in this lecture .  (Refer Slide Time: 2:38)  
 
Now let us see first what a re the important sulphur  fertilizers . So these are some of the important 
sulphur fertilizers like nitrate sulphate , which contains 5 to  14 percent of sulphur , then 
ammonium sulphate , which is the major  sulphur fertilizer which contains  24 percent of sulphu r, 
then simple superphosphate contains 12 percent of sulphur , then ammonium sulphate phosphate 
contains 14 to 20 percent of sulphur .  
Calcium sulphate contains 14 to 18 percent of sulphur . Potassium sulphate contains 16 to 22 of 
sulphur . Calcium magnesium sulphate contains 22 percent of sulphur . Magnesium contains 18 
percent of sulphur  and magnesium sulfate , which is also known as kieserite, so there are two 
types of magnesium sulphate salts , one is Epsom salts , which contain 18 percent , another is 
magnesiu m sulfate which is kieserite  contains 22 percent of  sulphur .  
And so there are different types of sources for elemental sulphur . First of all , the elemental 
sulphur contains 85 to 100 percent of sulphur . Triple superphosphate granulated with sulphur 
will c ontain 18 percent sulphur and sulphur bentonite contains 85 to 90 percent of sulphur . So 
these are some of the sulphur sources  which we can apply as fertilizer to correct the sulphur 
deficiency .  (Refer Slide Time: 4:13)  
 
Now let us first start discussi ng with the ammonium sulphate . So this ammonium sulphate looks 
like this white crystalline salt like compound , now it has 24 percent sulphur  and it has water 
solubility of 750 grams per liter and  solution p H of this ammonium sulphate can  vary from p H 5 
to 6. Now remember that 70 percent of this global output of this ammonium sulphate originates 
from the production of caprolactam .  
And the main advantage of ammonium sulphate are  they have low hygroscopicity and they have 
chemical stability also . So this is t he structure of ammonium sulphate .  (Refer Slide Time: 5:03)  
 
And so the formula of ammonium sulphate is NH4 w hole 2SO4. P roperties we can see here 
molar mass of 132.14 gram per mole , density is 1.769 gram per cc at 20 degree centigrade and 
melting poin t of this ammonium sulphate varies from 235 to 280 degree centigrade . And so 
which is equivalent to 455 to 536  degree Fahrenheit and 508 to 553 Kelvin .  
So these are some of the  characteristics of ammonium sulphate . So ammonium sulphate is a salt 
like comp ound you can , this is what ammonium sulphate looks like . So apart from nitrogen  
which contains around 20 to 21 percent it also supplies the sulphur  as a secondary nutrient .  (Refer Slide Time: 6:01)  
 
So single superphosphate it  contains  11 to 12 percent  of sulphur and single superphosphate is 
also known as ordinary superphosphate or normal superphosphate or simple superphosphate . So 
it is composed of 50 percent by weight of monocalcium phosphate as well as gypsum or its lower 
hydrate . So this thing singl e superphosphate is also another  phosphatic fert… another fertilizer 
which contain this secondary sulphur . 
Another sulphur  source is ammonium phosphate sulphate , which is composed of 40 percent 
mono ammonium phosphate and 60 percent ammonium sulphate . The m ost common grade of 
ammonium phosphate sulphate is given there that is 16 -20-0-14 percent sulphur and it is made of 
reacting a mixture of phosphoric acid and sulphur ic acid with ammonia and introducing 
ammonium sulphate solution and sulphur ic acid into a p hosphoric acid plant reaction circuit . So 
this ammonium phosphate sulphate is another sulphur fertilizer .  (Refer Slide Time: 7:13)  
 
 
Potassium sulphate - Now potassium sulphate generally it varies from sulphur contents varies 
from 16 to 22 percent . So we have already  discussed here in the potassium sulphate that is 16 to 
22 percent , so again  here we can see that the potassium sulphate sulphur content varies from 16 
to 22 percent . About 25 percent of the world  potassium sulphate capacity is based on the  reaction 
between potassium chloride and H2SO4.  
So when there is a reaction between potassium chloride and sulphur ic acid that will create this 
potassium sulphate . Gypsum which is calcium sulphate dehydrate,  so this is another important sulphur source . So in case of gypsum it contains 14 to 18 percent of sulphur . So gypsum by 
product comes from different fossil fuel power station where sulphur is scrubbed from exhaust 
gases . It is also called the land plaster .  
So generally gypsum is used  for plastering pu rposes , so also known as plaster of Parries. 
Improves , when we apply this  gypsum it improves acid soils and treats  aluminum  toxicity and  
improves the  water infiltration and soil structure . However , gypsum is mainly applied for 
correcting the alkalinity of the soil .  
So what happens when we apply the gypsum into the soil that the calcium from the gypsum 
replaces the sodium from the alkaline soil and thereby , improves the physical condition of the 
soil. So to reduce the alkalinity of the soil  we generally app ly gypsum . Gypsum is another 
important source of sulphur , which contains 14 to 18 percent of sulphur .  
So if we see the whatever  sources which we have discussed , we have already discussed this  
ammonium  sulphate , we have discussed , sorry , we have discussed this ammonium sulphate , we 
have discussed this single or simple superphosphate , we have also discussed this ammonium 
sulphate phosphate and then  we have discussed this potassium sulphate . So these are some of the 
major  sulphur fertilizers  which we apply fo r correcting the sulphur deficiency in crop plants .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:06 )  
 Let us now discuss what are the factors which affect the sulphur availability in the soil . First 
important factor is type an amount of clay . So higher amount of clay decrease s the sulphur 
availability . Secondly  the p H, pH is the amount of release d sulphur is directly proportional to 
soil p H up to p H 7.5. Third is organic matter , as we know that sulphur is an important 
component of several  essential amino acids or proteins .  
So of course , the higher organic matter implies higher sulphur supplying capacity  in the soil , so 
higher organic matter facilitates the sulphur supply to soil .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:53 )  
 
Salt content is another important factor because accumulation of sul phur favored in soils of high 
salt content like coastal saline and alkaline soil . So wherever there are saline soils that will help 
in accumulation of sulphur compounds . Cations and anions are also important factors . Acid soil 
containing  higher amount of p roton retain a greater amount of sulphate sulphur .  
Presence or absence of vegetation - A greater amount of sulphur is mineralized in the cropped 
soil as compared to the uncropped soil . So the salt contain cations and anions and presence or 
absence of vege tation all these are important factors which governs the sulphur availability to the 
crop.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:42 )  
 
Another  important factor is alternate wetting and drying . So drying after soil saturation can 
reduce the sulphur content in the soil . So that is also important factor . And finally interaction of 
sulphur with other nutrients are also  important  for controlling the sulphur availability to the 
plant . So the application of zinc increase d the utilization of sulphur by the crops and the 
interac tion of nitrogen and sulphur  found to be synergistic in nature .  
So of course , this nitrogen and sulphur are synergistic because they perform  almost some similar  
functions within the plant body . So a similar positive interaction has found between sulphur a nd 
phosphorus . So we can see some similarity between nitrogen and sulphur and also interestingly 
there are some similarity between nitrogen and sulphur deficiency symptoms .  
Although there are some stark differences we are going to discuss this  in this upc oming slide , but 
remember there is some confusions of , there may be some confusion regarding the nitrogen as 
well as sulphur deficiency symptoms in the plants and there are certain ways to detect those , we 
are going to discuss those .  (Refer Slide Time: 13:02)  
 
So if we see the availability of the elements at different soil p H we can see that although with the 
increase of soil p H, the availability of iron , manganese , copper , zinc and aluminum decreases , 
but the availability of molybdenum , calcium , magnes ium and nitrogen sulphur and potassium 
increases . So the temp , the raising the soil p H up to 7.5 will have the  beneficial effect to the 
availability of sulphur .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:42 ) 
 So NS, let us discuss then NS ratio. So sulphur metabolism in plan t is closely linked with 
nitrogen as both the constituents are ; as both nitrogen and sulphur  are constituents of protein , so 
NS ratios generally  vary from 15 to 16 is to 1 for legume . For cereals is vary from 11 to 12 is to 
1 and so basically you can see h ere nitrogen is greater in legumes , of course .  
And NS ratio of 10 is to 1 in fertilizer can meet the sulphur requirement of the crops . So in the 
absence of sulphur  in the soil utilization of nitrate can be also hampered , because they have some 
synergistic  relationship . Utilization of nitrate can also be hampered if there is sulphur deficiency 
in the soil .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:33 )  
 
Now what are the symptoms of sulphur deficiency ? Sulphur deficiency symptoms appear first on 
the younger leaves . So this is  the most stark difference with the nitrogen deficiency symptoms . 
Remember that in case of nitrogen deficiency symptoms the , since nitrogen is mobile within the 
plant , so nitrogen deficiency symptoms occur in the older leaves .  
But in case of sulphur , sulphur is relatively immobile within the plant , so that is why sulphur 
deficiency occurs first in the younger leaves . Fruits also do not mature fully and remains light 
green in color . So this is another important feature of sulphur deficiency . Poor nodulation  in 
legumes and leaves also become pale yellow or light green and maturity in cereal is delayed and in cotton , tobacco and citrus some of the older leaves are also affected first . So we can see these 
are some common  sulphur deficiency symptoms .  
(Refer Sli de Time: 15:34 )  
 
Interveinal chlorosis  is also important deficiency symptoms which we are going to discuss . So 
you can see here it is a sulphur deficiency , severe sulphur deficiency in wheat . So this is the 
normal healthy wheat plant and here you can see  sulphur deficient wheat.  So you can clearly see 
what is the importance of sulphur  for the plant growth .   
(Refer Slide Time: 15:55 )  
  
Another is  picture you can see here one is with proper dose of sulphur and here you can see the 
sulphur deficient . So sulphur sufficient and sulphur  deficient , so you can see the changes . As you 
can remember I have already told you that  there are some color changes when  there is a sulphur 
deficiency , so that can be  easily seen here  in this cabbage leaves .  
(Refer Slide Ti me: 16:23 )  
 
Also we can see some interveinal chlorosis and pale strips visible between the veins , so that is 
why it is called interv einal chlorosis . So these are the banana leaves , so you can see interveinal  
chlorosis can be easily seen  for sulphur defic iency .  (Refer Slide Time: 16:40 )  
 
Also you can see here this is th is photograph showing the sulphur deficiency in ground nut .  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:47 )  
 
So this is showing sulphur deficiency in lettuce .  (Refer Slide Time: 16:52 )  
 
And here you can  see sulphur deficiency in potato .  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:59 )  
 
So as I told you there can be some confusion between  the symptoms of sulphur deficiency and 
nitrogen deficiency . So you should remember two important thing , one is in case of nitrogen 
deficie ncy classic symptoms description is yellowing  of the lower or older leaves from the leaf 
tip to the base down the midrib .  So these  symptoms generally occur in the older leaves first . In case of sulphur  deficiency classic 
symptom description is yellowing of new leaves in the who rl, sometimes with the interveinal  
stripping . So that is what is called interveinal  chlorosis , with lower leaves remaining uniform 
green . So since the sulphur is relatively immobile , of course , that is why the sulphur deficiency 
symp toms appear in the new leaves .  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:52 )  
 
Now both nitrogen and sulphur are tied together due to several common physiological processes . 
Therefore , early growth symptoms can be similar , so I told you that both nitrogen and sulphur  
are im portant components of protein . So you can expect that  they have some common 
physiological processes . So the early growth symptoms can be similar . Examples  can be 
including overall leaf and plant yellowing , spindly plants and interveinal  stripping .  
And the se similar symptoms most often occur when plants are small and there is severe 
deficiency , there is low soil supply and no fertilization . Also plant response from fertilizer 
application can be quite similar for nitrogen and sulphur that is good growth and green plants 
with uniform coloration . So when you apply the fertilizer in the soil both nitrogen and sulphur 
fertilizer will see some plant response .  
So the plant response can be similar in both these cases because they have similar physiological  
roles in  the plant body . So we can see good growth and green plants with uniform coloration .  (Refer Slide Time: 19:13 )  
 
So guys so that makes the end of a discussion of sulphur . So we have learned that sulphur is a 
very important component . It has  role for  grow th of the plant and sulphur is an important 
component of cruciferous plant and sulphur  is present as a structural component of different 
essential amino acids so they f orm the proteins also and they have similarity in physiological 
process , physiological r oles as we can see in case of nitrogen .  
So nitrogen and sulphur deficiency symptoms are almost same , however , in case of nitrogen 
deficiency symptoms occur in the older leaves because of its mobility within the plant however , 
in case of sulphur the  defici ency symptoms occur in the newer leaves because of relative 
immobility within the plants .  
We have also discussed different sources of sulphur and also sulphur fertilizers , we have 
discussed about single super phosphate , we have discussed about ammonium su lphate , we have 
discussed about gypsum . And so these are the common  sulphur  source , which we apply to 
correct any sulphur deficiency .  
One of the major sulphur deficiency symptoms is interve inal chlorosis . So chlorosis occurs 
within the veins , so that is w hy it is known as interve inal chlorosis . So we have also discussed 
the sulphur cycle . So I hope that you have got , you have gathered some useful knowledges from 
this lecture and let us wrap up this lecture .  These are some of the references , which I have u sed for  this for this lecture and let us meet in our 
next lecture to discuss the  magnesium and its importance for plant metabolism . Thank you.  