Soil Fertility a nd Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture  1 
Importan ce of Soil Nutrient Management a nd Basic Soil -Plant Relationship  
Welcome friends to this  NPTEL  online certification course of Soil Fertility and Fertilizers. 
And we are at week 1 and in this week we are going to discuss the importance of soil nutrient 
management and basic soil plant relationship.  
So, today we are going to discuss our first l ecture and we are going to see the basic overview 
of soil nutrient management as well as what are the importance of soil nutrient, we are going 
to learn some of the important terminologies and also we are going to discuss the some of the 
important nutrient  related relationship with the with the plant growth.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:08)  
 
So, let us start and these are the concepts which we are going to discuss in this lecture. First 
of all we are going to see the definition of soil and then soil health param eters we are going to 
discuss and then we are going to discuss the soil fertility and soil productivity what is the , 
what are the differences between soil fertility and soil productivity and lastly, we are going to 
discuss the growth response curves.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:36)  
 
These are the some of the keywords soil nutrients , soil formation process , law of  minimum , 
law of  diminishing return , law of  maximum, we are going to discuss all these in this in this 
first lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:50)  
 
So, let us start with the definition of the soil. Now, we all know that soil is a heterogeneous 
mixture, if you have followed my , my soil science and technology NPTEL  course  I have 
defined , I have given the basic definition of the soil. Now, the basic definit ion of soil says it 
is a heterogeneous mixture comprised of both the solid metrics as well as water as well as air 
and in the solid metrics you can see both the mineral matter as well as the soil organic matter.  However, from the ancient time, different p hilosophers as well as scientists have defined the 
soil in their own manner. So, we can we can discuss couple of them. So, according to C.E. 
Millar and Turk in 1943, they have defined that a soil is an entity, an object in nature, which 
has characteristics  that distinguish it from all other objects in nature.  
So, they are emphasizing that soil itself a unique matter in the unique, unique entity  in the in 
the whole ecosystem, that has their own separate characteristics, which can be clearly, you 
can disting uish from the other matters. Apart from that John Jeaavons  has defined the soil as 
“Man, despite his artistic pretensions, his sophistication and his many accomplishments , owes 
his existence to a 15 centimeter layer of topsoil and the fact that it rains. ”  
Now, that implies the import ance of why soil management is becoming a crucial term in 
contemporary environmental management. Charles Kellogg from USDA, Yearbook of 
Agriculture , 1938. He defined , “Essentially all life depends upon the soil, there can be no  life 
without soil and no soil without life, they have evolved together. ” So, he is pointing out that 
life cannot be , a life cannot sustain without the presence of the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:31)  
 
Now, in India, we have seen in Atharva Veda, the Sans krit Scripture of 1500 BC, they have 
also mentioned the importance of the soi l. So, there is a mention that “U pon this handful of 
soil, o ur survival depends . Husband  it will grow our food, our fuel, and our shelter  and 
surround us with beauty. Abuse it a nd the soil will collapse and die taking humanity with it ”.  So, that means, that in that ancient time also people have realized the importance of the soil. 
Now, soil provides us grains for our food, cotton for our clothes and timber for our homes, it 
is one  of the most important resources for mankind.  
Now, it is farming efficiency arising from deterioration of soil health, due to misuse of soil, 
which is at the root of non sustainable agriculture and associated degradation of environment. 
So, how we manage our soil is important and our farming efficiency , in efficiency you can 
tell plays an important role for managing for sustainably managing the soil resources  of the 
earth.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:56)  
 
Now, we already know that soils are not merely an accumu lation of debris resulting from 
decay of rock and organic materials, these are developed as rocks and are, as rocks are 
weathered and covered with organic materials.  
Now, we all know that how soil develops ? Soil develops from rocks and due to , I mean, it 
takes hundreds to millions years of  a continuous different weather ing process as well as 
different types of pedogenic processes for developing one inch of topsoil.  
Now, it says clearly that it takes about 500 years for one inch of topsoil to form. So, soi l 
forms in layers we know and from the rocks due to different types of physical chemical and 
biological weathering apart from different pedogenesis , they convert into soil.  (Refer Slide Time:  6:57) 
 
Now, the most important term of this lectur e is soil h ealth, what is soil health? H ow we 
define soil health  and how we measure soil health?  Now, soil health is basically the capacity 
of the soil to function within ecosystem boundaries to sustain biological productivity, 
maintain environmental quality, and pro mote plant and animal health.  
So, it is a comprehensive term, which shows the ability of the soil to maintain or to sustain 
the biological productivity to maintain the environmental quality and pr omote plant and 
animal health a t the same time. Remember th at a healthy soil would ensure proper retention 
and release of water and nutrients, it promote and sustain root growth, maintain soil biotech 
habitat, respond to management and resist degradation.  
So, that is why a maintaining the soil health is of utmost  importance for natural resource, the 
people for who are dealing with different types of natural resources.  (Refer Slide Time:  8:21) 
 
So, if you see the soil health effects on the plants, in this picture, you can see the healthy state 
this first plant i s showing the he althy state and here we are, it is we a re seeing that there is 
abundance of different nutrients . Of course in the soil, there are different types of pathogens 
as well as beneficial microorganisms.  
However, when they are at equilibrium, we can see that plants are showing the healthy state . 
Of course, when the pathogen dominates and impacts the plant that can produce the infection 
in the plants. And also there is disease oppressiveness and finally, you can see the nutrient 
deficiency . Nutrien t deficiency occurs wh en you can see there is a clear  depletion of the 
nutrients around the roots or edge of sphere.  
So, that shows the effect of soil health on plants, if the soil is healthy, then you can see the 
healthy state of the plant, if the soil i s not healthy, then you can see there is different types of 
either nutrient deficiency or there could be manifestation of different types of diseases. Now, 
we can see here in an inhaled state, of course there will be an equilibrium between the 
beneficial m icroorganisms and of course there will be patho gens, but at the same time there 
should be adequate amount of nutrients are also.  (Refer Slide Time:  10:07 ) 
 
Now, we can see how to measure the soil health. Now, as I have mentioned that the soil 
health is governed by a number of physical, chemical and biological attributes and processes, 
and these measurement of soil health is expressed by different quantitative and qualitative 
measures of these attributes .  
So, also by outcome, that are governed by soil su ch as productivity, nutrient and water use 
efficiencies and quality of the produce. So, if you can see that the what are the different 
players of soil health indicators, you can see that chemical environment is an important 
component then physical environm ent is another important component, then biological 
environment is another important component.  
And of course, as I have pointed out many times, previously in my other courses, soil organic 
matter is one of the major indicator of soil health condition. So , you can see that the soil 
health indicators can be grouped into these four categories and all of these are important and 
they impact the soil ultimate soil health.  (Refer Slide Time:  11:26 ) 
 
Now, if we classify the soil health into three categories li ke physical properties, chemical 
properties and biological properties, we can see that among the physical properties, we can 
see the structure properties are important, what are the structural properties ? Some of the 
structural properties you can see bulk density, aggregate stability and soil strength, it gets 
hydraulic properties, infiltration, hydraulic conductivity , water detentions are important .  
And some dynamic soil physical properties are also important like soil consistency, crusting, 
compaction an d permeability, those who have no t gone through these terms, I would request 
you to go through the my soil science and technology lectures which are available, which are 
also available freely in YouTube.  
In the chemical properties, you can see that soil r eaction and electrical conductivity are the 
two most important soil chemical properties which are regulating the soil health. Apart from 
that the nutrient availability and as I have mentioned soil organic matter play an important 
role for maintaining the s oil health. Now, regarding the biological properties of course, 
microbial population, enzymatic activity and soil respiration these three are important 
indicators or I would say they are important factors for biological factors for controlling the 
soil hea lth.  (Refer Slide Time:  13:07 ) 
 
Now, we know all that the soil formation p rocess if we remember the Ge nie’s soil formation 
theory, we can see that soil formation is a function of relief , time, parent material  climate and 
different types of organisms. No w, of course, there has been several modifications from this, 
but this is the fundamental concept of soil formation. And from there, we can have an idea 
about how these different important parameters are controlling the soil formation.  
(Refer Slide Time:  13:44 ) 
 
Now, let us see what is t he definition of soil fertility? S oil fertility it is the potential of the 
earth or inherited capacity of the soil to supply plant nutrients in quantity, forms and 
proportion required for the growth and development of the crop. Now, remember that here I 
have underlined one important term that is inherent capacity of the soil.  So, fertility is measured by the amount of chemical elements or compound required for the 
plant growth. But this definition of the soil fertility dif fers from soil productivity which terms 
which is basically the soil productivity is basically the capacity to produce the plants under 
specified program of management. Now, it is measured by the yield of the crop per unit area 
of the land. Remember, there is a stark difference between soil fertility and soil productivity .  
A soil may be fertile, but it may or may not be productive because here the productivity is 
solely dependent on the produce. So, a lthough some soils are inherent, same some soils may 
have  high inherent capacity to supply the nutrients and required quantities to the plant, they 
may not produce the required quantity of the output or yield of the crop due to different types 
of factors. So, that is why soil fertility and soil productivity are not same, they differ from 
each other.  
(Refer Slide Time:  15:35 ) 
 
Now, fertility is one of the factors of soil production and sometimes a soil may be fertile but 
may not be productive just like I have said in our previous slide. Now, this shows this tabl e 
shows the clear difference between the soil fertility and productivity then you can see that 
soil fertility is an index of available nutrients of the plants.  
However, soil productivity is used as a broader term to indicate the crop yield . It is soil 
fertility is generally analyze d in laboratory condition or in -situ field  test of different soil 
parameters and soil pro ductivity i t is generally assessed in field under particular climatic 
situation by incorporating soil , crop, climate, irrigation and other f actors and their interaction 
which influence existing crop.  So, not only here in soil productivity, we are concerned about soil, but there is a mixed 
interplay between the climate, irrigation and crop and soil these factors they interact with 
each other t o finally get the produce, s o, that defines soil productivity. Of course, soil fertility 
is the function of soil nutrient content whereas, soil fertility is the function of soi l fertility 
plus management plus climate  contents .  
Remember that the soil ferti lity depends on soil , physical, chemical and biological properties. 
However, in case of soil for productivity, it depends on physiography , fertility and location of 
the soil. Now, I hope that it is clear what is the difference between soil fertility and 
productivity.  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:30 ) 
 
So, this is important from this point of view of soil fertility it is very very important to 
achieve a balan ced nutrition because if we do no t get balanced nutrition, our soil cannot be 
productive. So, how to achiev e this balanced nutrition , there are three important steps for 
achieving this balanced nutrition first of all to provide plants with essential nutrients.  
Secondly, to avoid over or under applying the nutrients, we should not apply too much of a 
nutrient t hat can create nutrient toxicity or we should not apply too little amount of nutrient 
that can create the soil nutrient deficiency and of course, we have to balance our input with 
maximum yield output. So, these are the three major pillars of achieving the  balanced 
nutrition for the plant.  (Refer Slide Time:  18:32 ) 
 
Now, if you see these, this diagram, it is quite clear that as we go from degraded cropland to 
restored  perenni al land, so, if we can go from these rest degraded cropland to restored 
perennia l crops, we can clearly increase the soil fertility, we can clearly increase the carbon 
accrued or accrual and we can also increase the nitrogen conservation .  
Of course, that also simultaneously increase phosphorus availability and retention. So, you 
can see all the beneficial factors for improving the soil faculty fertility improves. So, 
phosphorus availability and retention improves , nitrogen conservation improves and also 
carbon accrual is also improves. Of course, the nitrogen conservation is interrela ted with 
carbon accrual and ultimately all these three important factors influence in the augmentation 
of soil fertility.  
However, on opposite, the nutrient losses will be decreased substantially and also erosion of 
soil will also decrease substantially. So, these are the important factors, which you can see 
when we go from growing crops in the degraded crop lands to restore perennial , when we 
change the crop to with the perennial crops. So, that shows the importance of changing your 
practice for improving  the soil fertility.  (Refer Slide Time:  20:23 ) 
 
Now, next another important concept let me just drag it here. So, another important concept is 
concept is Liebig ’s Law of M inimum , now, what is Liebig ’s law of minimum ? Liebig ’s law 
of minimum  says just as  the capacity you can see this above is a barrel, so, our bucket you 
can consider it as an bucket.  
So, just as the capacity of the wooden bucket to hold water is determined by the end of the 
short est stave, crop yields are also restricted by the nutrients in shortest supply. So, you can 
see here in this barrel, these minimum, of the shortest stave is determining the level of water. 
So, the level of water will be up to this height it cannot go beyond . So, Liebig ’s law of 
minimum also says that the crop yield s are restricted by the nutrients in short est supply.  
So, here just one example, so, Liebig ’s law of minimum says that the growth or yield of a 
crop is limited by the factor which is present in relatively l east amount. So, here you can see 
suppose, for gr owing a crop , the requirement is nitrogen 100 and phosphorus is 50 and 
potassium is 60 and the available amount of nutrient is 40 , phosphorus is 25 and potassiu m is 
30. So, we can see only 40 percent  of nitrogen is available , 50 percent  of phosphorus is 
available and 50 percent  of potassium is available.  
So, here nitrogen is a factor which limits the crop growth because it is the least the nutrient 
which has the shortest supply. So, Liebig was the first to express the yield  as a mathematical 
function of th e given growth factor when all the other factors keep constant. So, here y equal 
to Ax minus B where A and B  are constant. So, Liebig is also known as the father of modern 
agricultural chemistry.  (Refer Slide Time:  22:33 ) 
 
So, what is Liebig’s law of min imum?  So, Liebig  developed the first mineral fertilizer 
applied to replenish the nutrients removed from soil by crops and clearly observed mineral 
fertilizers as part of sustainable agricultural practices. So, here you can see as we increase the 
nutrient s upply, the crop yie ld will really increase however  the growth of the crop will be 
determined by the list available factor. So, here you can see the strongest limiting us or a 
stress factor will be determined by the list limit among the most limiting nutrie nt.  
(Refer Slide Time:  23:21 ) 
 
So, if we go to Olympics law of minimum , some more examples you can see here in this 
example, we have nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, but phosphorus is the least available nutrient. So, the growth of the crop will be deter mined by phosphorus only . Another example 
is here, where potassium is the nutrient with the shortest supply.  
So, the crop growth will be based on this potassium . Here you can see that magnesium and 
sulphur  are tw o limited nutrients. So, of course, these t wo will govern the crop growth . And 
however, here you can see, all these are in the same, all these nutrients are in the same quality 
of supply.  
So, it is quite clear. So, in this case of course, they al l they a re governing the with the growth 
of the plan t. However, from here we can see that phosphorus potassium and magnesium 
sulphur  and influencing or controlling the growth of the crop because they are the minimum, 
they are the nutrients which has the shortest supply. So, this is the Liebig’s law of minim um.  
(Refer Slide Time:  24:39 ) 
 
So, another important term is law of diminishing return. Now, law of diminishing returns 
says when increase in yield of a crop per unit of available nutrient decreases as the level of 
available nutrient approaches sufficien cy. In other words, the increase in yield by a unit 
increment of the deficient factor is proportional to the decrement of that factor from the 
maximum.  
So, here you can see, when we are increasing the inputs lies from 0 to x, then 2x to 3x , and 
here in th e y axis, we can see the yield  percentage  of maximum. So, you can see 50 percent  
growth and 50 percent  yield , 100 percent yield , you can see four unit in crease of inputs from 
x to 2x a nd from 2x to 3x, the difference of or the yield increase is getting dec reased.  So, the increase in yield by unit increment of the deficient factor suppose this x is a deficient 
factor is proportional to the decrement of the factor from the maximum. So, that shows that 
this is called the law of diminishing return that means, we are increasing the inputs, but our 
return is diminishing.  
So, this is this can be mathematically expressed by Mitscherlich’s equati on, which is dy by 
dx equal to A  minus y into  C, by integration, we can see y  equal to A into 1 minus 10 to the 
power min us Cx , or i f you take the log, so log of A y equal to log of A minus C x. Remember 
that in this here, in  this equation, this dy is the yield  increase per unit available nutrient that is 
dx.  
So, dy by dx decreases as the current yield , which is supposed y ap proaches a maximum 
yield. So here A is the maximum yield. So , as our yie ld is approaching this maximum A, with 
C being  a proportionality constant, the  dy by dx is getting  decreased. So, this is the 
Mitscherlich’s equation . Again, as we are approaching towa rds the highest possible yield that 
is A, we are getting decreasing y ield per unit increase of inputs. So, this is called the 
Mitscherlich equation.  
(Refer Slide Time:  27:29 ) 
  
Now, this is the mathematical derivation, you can see dy A minus y and if we  take the 
integration the both sides will get this simplification minus from here we will get mi nus log 
of A minus y equal to Cx plus C  or if x is equal to 0, y equal to 0 and C equal to minus log A , 
we can see that minus log A minus y equal to Cx minus lo g A or we can simplify it to 
ultimately y equal to A into 1 minus 10 to the power minus Cx.  
So, it states that yield s are influenced by all limiting factors simultaneously, the influence of 
each of the limiting factor is proportional to its degree of limi tation. So, this is the ultimate 
mathematical equation, which we have seen previously. So, this is how we get this equation, 
we derive this equation.  
(Refer Slide Time:  28:29 ) 
 So, if we see the law of diminishing return, of course, here you can see that  kg of nitrogen 
applied per hectare as increased from 0, 40, 80, 120, 1 60, 200, 2 40, 280, 3 20. Unit increase 
from 40 kg you can see here we can see maize  yield  in kg per hectare, it is 30 5, 1372, 2135 , 
2643 . So, you can see that yield increase in  kg gettin g diminished as we continue to increase 
our inputs.  
So, here we continue to increase our inputs from 0 to 40 to 80 to 120 to up to 220 however, 
the yield increase in kg you can see here it is continuously getting decrease. So, yield  
response to fertilizer  follows the law of diminishing returns which has especially important 
consequence s for limited resources farmers. S o, limit  resource farmers, you can clearly see 
that with the increase of their input, how much increase in yield they will get. So that show s 
the importance of input especially  for the limited -resource farmers.  
(Refer Slide Time:  29:43 ) 
 
Another important term that immobile nutrients generally phosphorus , potassium, calcium 
follow generally the Mitscherlich’s  concept this is important to rem ember.  (Refer Slide Time:  29:53 ) 
 
And also there is another law that is called the law of maximum. This law of maximum is a 
principle developed by Arthur Wallace and the law of maximum cannot operate if there are 
any Liebig type limiting factors present . So, it has two major characteristics , first the effect of 
a given i nput is progressively magnified  as other limiting factors  are corrected.  
The final result is greater than the sum of the effects of the individual inputs, because of the 
way in which the y interact and the interaction multiplies the effect of each. So, here 
individual growth factor will not be greater than the aggregate values of the growth factors. 
So, guys, we have defined in this class so far, what is soil and why it is important, why i t is 
important to maintain the soil, we have also seen, what is soil health, what are the important 
factors that controls the soil health, what are th e indicators of the soil health.  
Then, we have seen what is the Liebig’s law of minimum, we have seen the  law of 
diminishing return and also we have seen the law of maximum. So, let us wrap up our lecture 
here and wi ll go from  here in our next class, and wi ll discuss more about this the law of 
maximum. So, I wish you I wish you have learned something new. And  if you have any 
question, please feel free to post it in the forum. And we wi ll be more than happy to answer 
your queries. Thank you very much.  