Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agri cultur al and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Week 3  
Lecture  13 
Soil P and K Plant Nutrition  (Contd)  
Welcom e friends to this third week of NPT EL online certification course of soil fertility and 
fertilizers. And i n this week 3 we are discussing soil phosphorus  and potassium for plant 
nutrition.  We are going to start our lectu re 13. In the previous two lectures of this week , we 
have discussed about the basics of phosphorus nutrition for the plant . And also, we hav e 
discussed about the phosphorus cycle , and what are the important process , or factors of 
phosphorus availability to t he plants .  
And also, we have discussed about h ow p H and organic matter affects phosphorus 
availability , and we have also discussed  what are the  major forms of soil phosphorus, both 
organic forms as well as in organic forms. We have also discussed different  inorganic forms 
of soil phosphorus , and how ph osph orus get lost from the so il through different processes we 
have discussed.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 01:30) 
 
So, in this lectur e we are going to cover these following concepts . First of all, we are going to 
talk about the phosphorus fertilizers. And then we  are going to talk about phosp horus 
manufacturing process  and we are going to discuss our classification of phosphorus 
fertili zers.  (Refer Sli de Time: 01:48) 
 
So, these are the key words of this lecture, roc k phosphate , super phosphate , curing, DAP or 
diammo nium phosphate  and nitro phosphates. So, we are going to discuss all these in this 
lecture.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 02:03) 
 
So, let us discuss about phosphorus fertilizers , or P fertilizers. So, the basic ingre dient for 
producing phosphorus fertilizer is r ock phosphate. So, we have alrea dy know what is rock 
phosphate. Now, most rock phosphate comes from the mineral ap atite. So, we have discussed 
about apatite in our previous lectur es, which is a calcium phosph ate mineral that is mined out 
of the ground.  Now, phosphate rocks are of sedime ntary origin , and they are in the form of either pellets  or 
cemented together by calcium carbonate , or loose pellets w here cementing materials ha s been 
leached or withered away, or  they are compressed whole mass as hard  rock. 
(Refer Sli de Time: 02:51) 
 
The predominant mineral is rock phosphate, which i s Francolite, a  calcium carbonate 
fluorapatite . As you know the name suggests , it has the fluorine , as well as the other s are 
Chlorapatite  as well as Hydroxyapatite. Now, the f luoride content of rock phosphat e 
contributes to the insolubility of phosphate deposits , and increase in the degree of substitution 
of carbonate and fluorine for phosphate in apatite results in increase in re activity of rock 
phosphate. So, as much as phos phate in the rock phosphate is be ing replaced by carbonate 
and fluorine , then it increases the reactivity of the rock phosphate.  (Refer Sli de Time: 03:45) 
 
Now, high grade rock phosphate can be found in these co untries , Morocco, USA, Al geria, 
Tunisia, the  UAE  and the Pacific Islands of Naura, Christmas Island and Makatea . So, the 
largest deposit of rock phosphate can be found in Morocco , which is around 21,000 million 
tonnes followed by USA which is 13, 290 milli on tonnes. So , this rock pho sphate is the majo r 
ingredient of phosphatic fert ilizers . 
(Refer Sli de Time: 04:21) 
 
According to the Geological Survey of India, the phosphate rock deposits in India are 
estimated at 8,12,000 tonnes . And the major po rtions are found in in the following states : 
Tamil Nadu , Rajasthan, Bihar, Jharkhand , Uttar Pradesh , Uttarancha l, Lakshad weep , and Purulia district of West Bengal.  Now, most conventional phosphatic fertilizers are made by 
reacting rock phosphate with sulfuri c acid to produce a phosphoric acid.  
So, we have to pro duce  first phosphoric acid . Now, how to produce this phosphoric acid ? We 
have to react this rock phosphate  with sulfuric acid. Now, the phosphoric acid is then further 
process ed to create many of the more common phosphatic fertilizers.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 05:11) 
 
So, this flowchart sh ows the manuf acturing of phosphatic fertilizer , it is quite clear that we 
start with the rock phosphate , and when it reacts with the sulfuric acid , and then phosphor ic 
acid, it produced the super phosphate  with the P2O5 content , remember in the phosphatic 
fertilizers, the phosphorus content is generally  represented by phosphorus pentoxide 
percentage. So, in the superphosphate  the P2O5  content is 18 to 20  percent . And , when  this is 
concentration is done by evaporation , and we mix w e further mix with th e roc k phosphate it 
will produce triple superphosphate .  
Now, the P2O5  content of the triple superphosphate  varies from 40 to 48  percent . Now, while 
rock phosphate is reacted with H2SO 4, and H3PO4  when it reacts. So, actually what happe ns 
when we react rock pho sphate with H2SO4 it produce th is H3P04, and when from this 
H3PO4 we create this superphosphate  by concentration by evaporation .  
And, further , when we add these rock phosphat es with these phosphoric acid it produced  this 
triple superphosphate . And when is ammonia is added to this phosphoric acid it produce these 
ammonium phosphate , which contains 46 to 48  percent  of P205. So, this is how the manufacturing of phosph atic fertilizers can be  achieved . So, this is a very b asic overview we  
are going to disc uss the m in details.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 07:06) 
 
Now , so manufacturing process of phosphat ic fertilizer . Let us consider only single 
superphosphate  which is one of the most common phosphatic fert ilizer. So, this single 
superphosphate  is manufac tured by the  follo wing process. There are two process one is batch 
process;  second one is continuous process. So, let us discuss first the batch process , and then 
we are going to discuss the continuous proce ss. Now , in the batch process, it required  
quantiti es of pulve rized  rock phosphate and sulfuric acid  are mixed for 1 to 2 minutes in a 
container known as a mix er.  
So, first of all, we are mixing the pulve rized  rock phosphate with the sulfuric acid for 1 to 2 
minutes in a mixer , then the mix materia l is dropped in  a den , or bin, or pit, or compartment 
and kept for 3 to 36 hours . This mixture of rock phosphate and sulfuric acid. Now , in some 
plant  the mixture escaped for only 15 minutes. So, this the first step of manufacturin g of 
single superphosphat e through batch  process . (Refer Sli de Time: 08:24) 
  
Now  the water vapor , when we keep this mixture , the water vapor carbon dioxide and HF , or 
hydrogen fluoride formed in the reaction esca ped from the product and make it fr iable . So, 
the whole mixtur e becomes friable , then the material is transferred to curing  piles, where it is 
stored for several weeks . Generally,  it varies from 2 to 10 weeks for completion of the 
chemical reaction , and the produc t is completely cured and dried .  
Now, if needed, it is  further dried by heat , air stream , or dusting with rock phosphate. Now 
during the curing process, a shrinkage about what is about  10 percent  shrinkage occurs due to 
release of water vapor, carbon dioxide , and hy drogen fluoride . And, the product is then 
excavated, pulverize d, and b agged. So, this is how the single superphosphate  is generally 
produced.  (Refer Sli de Time: 09:22) 
 
Now, let us discuss , also this is the batch process we have considered. Now we are going to  
discuss about  the continuous process . Now, in this continuou s proces s of single 
superphosphate  production. It requires, required  quantities of pulverized rock phosphate to 
react with sulfuric acid , and it is mixed continuously in a mixture for 2 to 3 minutes. Then 
this mixture is transferred to one  end of the co ntinuous de n fitted over a slat conveyor. And , 
then the mixture solidifies  in the den.  
The solid product is slowly moved to the other  end of the den towards the rotary cutter , by 
the conveyor, here the solid product is cut into small pi eces by the cutter . The pieces are then 
transf erred to a cutting curing pile for curing , and the cu red product is then ba gged . So, this is 
the difference between a batch process as well as the continu ous process.  (Refer Sli de Time: 10:22) 
 
Now, if we see th e flowchart for manuf acturing  of phosphatic fertilizer, it can be more clea r 
how these different phosphatic fertilizers are formed. So, we start with , of course, the rock 
phosphate which is the ba sic ingredient of phosphatic fertilizers. So, when we react this rock 
phosphate with H2SO 4, it produced the single superphosphate , when you mix the single 
superphosphate  with ammonia , it produce  ammoniated superphosphate . Now again when 
rock phosphate is reacted with the phosphoric acid, it produced  triple superphospha te, and 
then it w hen we a dd ammonia , then it produce  ammoniated superphosphate .  
Rock phosphate mixed with the H2SO4 produce H3P04 , and ultimately it can produce 
enriched superphosphate . And then , rock phosphate when it mixed with the ni tric acid, it 
produ ce the nitrophosp hate, we are going to discuss this nitrophosphate in our coming slides . 
And then , it produce the diammonium phosphate and Suphala  in the next step.  (Refer Sli de Time: 11:33) 
 
 
So, let us go ahea d and see  how these , what are th e other ph osphatic fertili zer which  can be 
produced. So , H3PO4 when it reacts with  ammonium , we know it produce , it will produce  
monoammonium phosphate , and then subsequently 2 diammonium phos phate . In the 
previous slide we have already discussed that  when H3PO4 reacts with  ammonia , it produ ce 
the so, here whe n rock phosphate and H2SO4  mix it produced the H3PO4, and H3PO4 a 
when it mix with the ammonia , it produces the ammoniated superphosphate.  
So, this ammoniated superphosphate  can be either  monoammonium phosphate , or 
diammonium phosphate.  So, thi s is how these  monoammonium phosphate and diammonium 
phosphate . Diammonium phosphate is one of  the major phosphat ic fertilizers . Also, when H3PO4 reacts wi th HNO3, and ammonia , it produce ammonium phosphate nitrate which is  
another fertil izer.  
When a H3PO4 reacts with H2SO4 and ammonia , it reacts ammonium phosphate sulphate . 
When H3PO4 reacts with the  ammonia it produce a urea , and then and also mix with the u rea 
it produce urea ammonium phosphate , also known as Gromor which  is one of the  most 
commo n fertilizer in India .  
And, when there is a removal of water molecule from H3PO4, it produce pyro phosphoric 
acid and further removal of H2O from the pyro phosp horic acid can produce tri poly 
phosphoric acid. So, this is how from t he H3PO4  diffe rent typ es of phosphoric fertilizers can 
be produced . 
(Refer Sli de Time: 13:25) 
 
Now, let us see the classific ation of phosphatic fertilizers. So, generally the phosphat ic 
fertilizers are grouped into three  major categories, one is water soluble , another  is cyclic acid 
soluble , and the third one is phosphate fertilizer not soluble in water and citric acid or 
insoluble.  So, generally the mono calcium phosphate comes under the  water-soluble  
phosphate di calcium phosphate comes under the citric acid s oluble pho sphate , and tri calcium 
phosph ate comes under the insoluble phosphatic compound. Now, some examples of water -
soluble  phosphates are single superphosphate , double superphosphate , and triple 
superphosphate .  
In case of single superphosphate , we know  the phosp hate, P2O5 content varies from 16 to 18  
percent . In case of double superphosphate , it varies it i s around 32  percent . And in case of triple superphosphate , it varies f rom 46 to 48 percent . In case of c itric acid soluble phosphate , 
generally it co mes it enc ompasses basi c slag, then silicates of lime , and dicalcium  phosphate, 
where the first P2O5 content varies fr om 14 to 18 , and 34 to 39  percent . In case of insoluble 
phosphate , rock phosphate is an important , important example of insoluble phosphat e which 
basically co nsists of tr icalcium phosphate. So, rock phosphate contains 20 to 40  percent  of 
phosphate P2O5 , raw bone  meal s teamed  content 20 to 25  percent , and bone m eal content 22  
percent  of P2O5 content.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 15:16) 
 
Now, if we con sider the general propert ies of different groups of phosphatic f ertilizers, water 
soluble phosphates are , they basically they , wate r soluble phosphatic fertilizer cont ain water 
soluble phosphoru s, it can be they can be easily available to the plants as mon ocalcium the 
H2PO4  minus , or primary o rthophosphate  ion. H owever , within very short time they are 
converted into insoluble phosphate  when they are applied to the soil , due to different types of 
fixation. The magnitude of such reaction in soil depends on th e nature a nd properties o f the 
soil.  
How ever, citric acid soluble phosphate which is di calcium phosphates , are not readily soluble 
and they are not readily available to the plants , and they are sui table for acidic soils . Because 
they are not , they are citric aci d soluble so, of c ourse, as t he name suggests they  are suitable 
for acidic soils. The third category that is insoluble phosphatic f ertilizers are suitable for 
strongly acidic soils , and also the organic soil. So, these are the some of the difference s in 
their general charac teristics.  (Refer Sli de Time: 16:33) 
 
So, let us discuss about the superphosphate . So, members of these , there a re several members 
of this group like single superphosphate , triple superphosphate , enriched superphosphate , we 
already know th at. In case of sin gle superphosphate , it contains 16  to 18  percent of P2O5 . 
However, this particular phosphatic fertilizer also conta ins two secondary minerals , what are 
those ? sulphur  and calcium. So, it contains 12  percent  sulphur , and 21  percent  of calcium.  
Triple superphos phate on the other hand consists 46 to 48  percent  of P2O5 . In case of enrich 
superphosphate , it contains 25 to 30  percent  of P2O5. And in case of  ammoniated 
superphosphate the P2O5 content is variable. So, th e chief fertilizer cons tituent is 
mono calcium ph osphate monohydrate , and formed from the reaction of rock phosphate with 
mineral a cis H3SO4 , we have already seen it in our previous slide . (Refer  Slide Time: 17:38) 
 
Now, let us consider the ammonium phospha tes. So, this ammonium  phosphate denotes a 
wide  variety of fertilizer produced by ammon iation  of phosphoric acid. So, when phosphoric 
acid reacts with the ammonia , will produce the ammoni um phosph ate. Now, completely they  
are completely water soluble , and rea dily available sou rce of phosphorus and nit rogen , these 
ammoniated phosphate as the name suggests, contains ammonium a s well as phosphorus. So, 
it can supply both phosphorus , and nitrogen . And, dry fertilizers , it is a dry fertilizer product.  
Initial soi l reaction can prod uce free ammonia which ca n cause s eedling injury. If too much 
fertilizer is placed near the  seed. It is an acidic forming , acid forming fertilizer because of the 
presence of amm onia and the initial reaction of DAP is generally alkaline . DAP  is 
diammonium p hosphate , which contains 18 percent  nitrogen and 46  percent  P2O5. I t is a one 
of the major phos phatic fertilizer , however the initial reaction of DAP is alkaline . (Refer Sli de Time: 18:57) 
 
So, what are the members of these ammonium phosphates? The fi rst member is  
monoammonium phosphate. So monoammonium phosphate as we know  form  from the 
reaction between H3PO4 and amm onia to produce this  monoammonium phosphate . There are 
fertilizer grades,  three  fertilizer grades, 11 48 0, 11 55 0, and 13  52 0. Here, the fir st dig it 
shows the nitrogen cont ent, second digit shows the P 205 content , and third digit shows the 
K2O content. So, the second one is diammonium phosphate DAP . You can see here this 
reaction  two molec ules of ammonia with H3PO4 produce these diammonium pho sphate . 
Fertilizer grade are 18 46 0, and 16  48 0. However, the most common is 18 46 0. 
Ammonium phosphate n itrate or APN. They have 3 to 4 fertilizer grades  26 26 0, then 8  16 
32, then 15  15 15, and 13  10 0. Then a mmonium phosphate sulphate  or APS it is a  mixture  of 
ammonium phosp hate and ammonium sulphate  the fertilizer grade is 20 to 20  0. And urea 
ammonium phosphate which is also known as Gromor,  very common fertilizer and it contains 
fertilizer grade  28 28 0, or N content is 28  percent , P2O5 content is  28 percent and there is no 
K2O content. So, these are some of the members of ammonium phos phate fertilizers.  (Refer Sli de Time: 20:33) 
 
Let us discuss about the nitr ophosphates. So, the members of these groups are nitrophosphate , 
there are two grades 20  20 0, and 16 14 0, and the Suphal a. Suphala  is also a nitrophosphate , 
which has the grade of 20 20 0. These nitro phosphates are manufactured by reacting rock 
phosphate with nitric acid , and the reaction produced a solution con taining mono calcium 
phosphate  and calc ium n itrate. So, to avoid  the hygroscopicity of calcium nitrate , so, calcium 
nitrate is a component of the , it is a product of this manufacturing process.  
So, to avoid the hygroscopicity of the calcium nitrate, it is con verted to calcium phosphat e, or 
calcium sulphate by adding th ese ph osphoric acid , or sulfuric acid , or as a sulph ate salt, and  
ammoniated . So, this is how the physical condition of these nitro phosphates can be improved , 
or rectified.  (Refer Sli de Time: 21:40) 
 
So, the end product  of thi s nitrophosphate manuf acturing process contains a complex 
assortment of salts , what are these ? These are ammonium phospha te, dicalcium phosphate , 
and ammonium nitrate , calcium sulphate . So, sometimes potassium sa lts are also added to 
make it complet e fertil izers.  
Suphala  which is a nitrophosphate is manufactured by mixing the diammonium phosphate 
with nitr ophosphate to get  a product of a grade of 20  20 0 in which 30  percent  of the 
phosphate is water soluble form , and rest is in citric acid soluble f orm. So , Suphala is another 
very p opular fertilizer in Indian subcontinent. So, this is also , it is a fertilizer whic h contains 
both nitrogen as well as phosphorus . 
(Refer Sli de Time: 22:35) 
 Ammonium polyphosphate , this is the formula , and t he fertili zer grade , there  are two 
fertilizer grade  10 34 0, or 11  37 0. So, it is th ey are  soluble readily available sources of 
phosphorus and nitrogen, it is a liquid fertilizer product , and popular source for starter 
fertilizers, it is a very good fertilizer s ource for mixing an d applying with mic ronutr ients 
which is a liquid, i t is a liquid fertilizer product and it can be mixed and applied with the 
micronutrien t fertilizers also.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 23:10) 
 
So, guys,  we have discussed about all the most o f the pho sphatic ferti lizers. So, let us wrap 
up this lecture , and let us start from here in the next lecture, where we  will discuss about the 
potassium also . And, how it is importa nt for plant nutrition. So, I hope you have got enough 
idea about d ifferent t ypes of  phosphatic f ertilize rs, we have seen that phosphate fertilizers can 
be differentiated based on their solubility in water as well as citric acid , or the ir insolub ility. 
They are broadly classified into water soluble fertilizers , and the  citric  soluble fert ilizer , or 
insolubl e fertilizer . In case of water -soluble  fertilizers, they are readily available to the plant 
however, they can be easily fixed by and becomes unava ilable to the plant.  
We have also seen the manufacturing process of singl e superpho sphate  through batch  proces s 
as well as t hrough continuous proce ss. And , we have we have understood that the basic 
ingredient for manufacturing of phosphate fertilizer is  a rock ph osphate , and rock phosphate  
is available in different countries . And majorly it is availabl e in Moroc co followed by USA.  
So, guys, I hope that you have got enough idea about the phosphatic fertilizers. We are going 
to discuss about these fertilizer s in details in our upcoming weeks. But , let us wrap up here and let us  start a new lectur e focusin g on mainly  the potassium , and is th e importance in plant 
nutrition . Thank you very muc h. 