Soil Fertility and Fertilizers   
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty   
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department   
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture 17 
Soil Secondary Nutrients and Their Role in Plant Nutrition (Cont.)  
Welcome friends to this 17th lecture  of NPTEL  Online Certification Course of  Soil Fertility and 
Fertilizers . And we are at week 4  where we are discussing the Soil Secondary Nutrients and 
Their Role in Plant Nutrition .  
So we have already discussed in our  previous lecture  regardin g the  calcium  and in this lecture we 
are going to  discuss  about sulphur.  And sulphur  is another  important nutrient , which is a  
component for different  important biomolecules . So we are going  to discuss them in details .  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:06)  
 
So these  are the concepts which we are  going to  cover  in this lecture . First of all , we are going to 
see what is  sulphur  cycle . And then we are going to  discuss what is the transformation  of organic 
sulphur . And then we are going to see the  characteristics of sul phur and forms and sources of 
sulphur.  So these are the four major concepts  which we are going to discuss  in this lecture .  (Refer Slide Time: 1:35)  
 
And these are some of  the keywords of this lecture ; pyrite , sulphur cycle , thiobacillus , galena and  
elem ental sulphur.  So these are some of  the keywords which we  will see  in this lecture .  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:49) 
 
Now we know that more than 95 percent of  the total sulphur in soil is present  in the organic 
matter . So most of the sulphur  you will see in orga nic compound  and around 95 percent  and the 
oxidation of sulphur is mediated  by a group of bacteria known as  thiobacillus bacteria . So the 
soil rich in organic matter  will obviously will have high sulphur  content .  Now in most  of cultivated land sulphur ran ges between 30 to 50 mg per kg or ppm  and coarse  
texture sandy soil have low  sulphur content than  fine textured soil . Now it is also important to 
remember  that the sulphur content is more in  surface soil than subsurface soil . And also  bulk of 
inorganic sul phur in rock is  present as pyrites or FeS2.  
So what we understand ? We understand that 95  percent of the total sulphur is present  in organic 
matter , whereas bulk of the  inorganic sulphur  in rocks is present as  a mineral called pyrite or 
FeS2 or ferrous sul phide . So this is how  sulphur is important , essential element .  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:25)  
 
And if  you see the roles of sulphur  it is a component of many  amino acids or essential amino 
acids  like cysteine , cysteine,  methionine , all these  contain sulphur.  So sulphur is an integral part 
of these  amino acids or essential amino acids . And it plays a role in photosynthesis . So this is 
another important role of  Sulphur.  It is especially important for  cruciferous plant .  
So these cruciferous plants are a very  much  dependent , they dependent on the sulphur  for their 
characteristics  and it is an important  element in symbiotic nitrogen fixation  for legumes . So 
again  this is an important component of  amino acids like  cysteine , cysteine,  methionine , and it 
plays  a role i n photosynthesis .  
It is also  important for different types of  cruciferous plants we are going to  discuss and also it is 
very important  for symbiotic nitrogen fixation in  legumes . We have already discussed about  the symbiotic nitrogen fixation in our  previ ous weeks and it activates enzymes  and coenzymes in the 
plants , so this is  another important role .  
And it is  essential in the synthesis of proteins . Since it is a component of  many amino acids , of 
course , it is essential for synthesis of protein  including  building of seed reserves . So due to their 
involvement or  since they are structural component of  different amino acids they are also  
required for synthesis of proteins .  
(Refer Slide Time: 5:32)  
 
So what are the important characteristics  of the sulphur ? So it is a 13th most  abundant element in 
earth crust . And sulphur content in the soil , if you  see what type of soil will contain high  amount 
of Sulphur,  so you will see  the calcareous soil will high contain  high amount of sulphur followed 
by peat  type of soil followed by marshy soil  followed by gr ey brown podzolic soil and  pedzolic 
soil. So among all the soil  calcareous soil contain most sulphur .  
And sulphur contained in crop families , of course , cruciferia , as I have already  told you contains 
highest qua ntity of  sulphur followed by leguminos ae and followed by gramin eae. So cruciferae  
crops contain high amount of this  sulphur compound . Concentration of sulphur in plant ranges  
from 0.1 to 0.5 percent . And ionic forms of sulphur absorbed by  the plant is sulp hate. So this is 
the only ionic form which plant can absorb  through their root .  Remember that sulphate is abundant in  arid zones . And the percent proportion or percent  content 
of sulphur in the earth crust is around  0.1 percent . So these are some of the i mportant  
characteristics of sulphur which you  have to remember .  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:03)  
 
And this is the sulphur  cycle . So if you  see the sulphur  cycle , like there are some atmospheric , 
from the atmosphere Sulphur dioxide can  come back  to the soil in t he form of acid rain  so, and 
also when plant residues  decompose that can add sulphur into the  soil. Animal manure and 
biosolids can  also add  Sulphur,  so organic sulphur .  
So plant residues as  well as animal manure and biosolids add  organic sulphur . From th is organic 
sulphur  due to the mineralization process  there will be formation of sulphate and  in the opposite 
process of  immobilization this sulphate  will again  go back to the organic sulphur . So this is  
mineralization and immobilization .  
This sulphate can  be further oxidized and  then can be uptake by the  plant . Elemental sulphur , 
elemental sulphate  where is there can also come into this  sulphate  pool and bacterial oxidation of 
the reduced  sulphur compounds like hydrogen sulfide  can enrich the sulphate  in the soil. And 
also bacterial reduction is the  opposite process where sulphate will be  reduced to hydrogen 
sulphide . Now the sulphate which is being produced  can be either absorbed  or mineral  sulphur or 
they can be further come into  this sulphate pool .  So this is how also we can see in the case of anaerobic respiration the  sulphate can produce this 
hydrogen  sulfide . Also decomposition of plant residues can  create the hydrogen sulphide whe re 
hydrogen sulfide can be oxidized  also by some lithotrophic bacteria . So this is how the sulphur 
can moves  within water soil and atmosphere . So this  is the example of sulphur cycle .  
And sulphur , as I have already told you , sulphur is a very , very important  component of the  plant 
system because it is a part of  essential ami no acid structures like  cysteine , cysteine,  methionine 
and ultimately they take part , they take an important role in the formation  of synthesis of proteins 
in the  plant .  
(Refer Slide Time: 9:46)  
 
Now what are the major steps of the  sulphur  cycle ? Of cou rse, formation of  inorganic sulphur 
can be either  biological or geological . And oxidation  of inorganic sulphur to sulfate or  
assimilative reduction of sulphate to  sulfide and also incorporation of  sulphide into organic 
compounds . So we  can see the oxidatio n of inorganic  sulphur to sulphate is an important step . 
Another step is assimilative reduction  of sulphate to sulfide and incorporation  of sulphide into 
organic compounds . So these are some of the important steps of  sulphur cycle .  (Refer Slide Time: 10:25)  
 
Now if you see the transformation of  organic sulphur , this is a important pictorial overview , so if 
we take this sulphur , elemental  sulphur in case of biological oxidation  due to different types of 
bacteria , it can produce this sulphate  and this sul phate can goes through  asymmetry sulphate 
reduction  by some microorganisms to  produce organic sulphur compounds .  
So this organic sulphur compound can be  further mineralized to produce this  sulfide and this 
sulphide can  further  oxidize both biologically or  chemically  to produce this sulphur . Now this 
sulphur  can again go through dissimilated  sulphur reduction and can produce this  sulphide 
compound . Now remember that there is a direct  conversion between sulphate and sulphate  by 
either biological oxidation , where sulphide gets converted into sulphate .  
The opposite process is known as  dissimilat ory sulphate  reduction , where  sulphate is converted 
into sulphide . So this is how  different forms of sulphur  can be  seen or we can see the movement 
of different forms o f sulphur or  interconnection between the different  forms of the sulphur which 
are mediated by different microbes which are  present in the soil .  (Refer Slide Time: 11:57 )  
 
Now what is the importance of sulphur  cycle ? Now it produce , the sulphur produce  fossil fuels , it 
is an important  component of fossil fuels such as coal , petroleum , and natural gas and it  
contributes ; sulphur contributes to a  majority of metal deposit because it  acts as a oxidizing as 
well as reducing  agent . And it can serve as the sou rce of energy  to the sulphur reducing bacteria 
present  in the hydrothermal vent .  
So in the  hydrothermal vents you see there are  sulphur reducing bacteria and when there  is a 
sulphur gives them energy , so it is  a source of energy . Reducing in , sulphur play s an important  
role in reducing the global warming , which is caused by the greenhouse gases  by absorbing the 
ultraviolet radiation  from the sun and also it helps  in the growth of the plants . So these  are some 
of the importances of sulphur or sulphur  cycle as a whole .  (Refer Slide Time: 12:59 )  
 
Now let us see what is  sulphur mineralization . Now the oxidation  of organic matter into sulphate 
is basically , it is a sulphur of  mineralization and it is done by  microorganism and this  
mineralization process can be expressed  using these  equations . So the organic sulphur  in the 
aerobic condition they will be converted into  sulfate and  proton .  
So the formation of this end  product sulfate is associated with the  formation of proton , hence this 
process lowers the soil  pH. So the formation of this end product  sulphate is associated with the  
formation of protons . So here you can see  not only sulfate but also the proton is  formed , so 
ultimately due to this , during this mineralization process  it will lower the soil p H. And also rate 
of mineralization is  affected by these four factors moisture , aeration , temperature and soil p H. So 
these four are important process which  affects the mineralization .  (Refer Slide Time: 14:09 )  
 
The opposite process of mineralization  is immob ilization . Immobilization is a  microbial 
conversion of inorganic  sulphur compounds to organic sulphur  compounds and  immobilization is 
a temporary phase . Now sulphur in soil is associated with  organic carbon in fixed CS ratio of  
about 140 is to 1. S o genera lly if the CS ratio which you can  see in the soil is around 140 is to 1.  
Now immobilization of  sulphur takes place of the soil when the  ratio of the either C or N to 
sulphur  is very wide . And optimum temperature for this  immobilization of sulphur is aroun d 35 
to 40 degree centigrade . So sulphur generally , in case of soil the CS ratio is  around 140 is to 1 , 
but in case of higher  CS ratio that will help in  the immobilization of sulphur .  (Refer Slide Time: 15:16 )  
 
So there is a  redox reaction or  reduction  oxidation reaction which is  also involved with the 
sulphur . So these  reactions are biochemical in nature and  are mediated by autotrophic bacteria  
belonging to the genus thiobacillus and  sulphate can be reduced by hydrogen  sulphide by these 
two groups of b acteria ; one is disulphovi brio another other is desuphatomaculum.  
So you can see here this is an  elemental sulphur , this elemental sulphur  can be oxidized into 
sulphate sulphur  by the action of soil microorganism  which are thiobacillus species  and, so this 
chemolithotropic bacteria can  oxidize this elemental sulphur into  sulphate and also in the 
presence of  light photolithoautotrophy  bacteria  can also  oxidize this  hydrogen sulphide into  
elemental  sulphur .  
So these are  oxidation reaction we can see here . Here first the elemental sulphur is oxidized  to 
sulphate and here  these H2S is oxidized to  elemental sulphur . So and  these are  mediated  by 
different chemolithotropic bacteria as well as  photolithoautotrophy .  (Refer Slide Time: 16:46 )  
 
Now what are the f orms of the sulphur ? So sulphur can be broadly classified  into two major 
forms , one is inorganic  form another is organic forms . So in the inorganic form we can see  
readily soluble sul phates, adsorb  sulphates , insoluble sulphate , co-precipitate d with calciu m 
carbonate and  also reduce inorganic sulphur compounds  like sulphide and elemental sulphur . In 
the organic form we can see  hydroiodic  acid reducible  sulphur , then carbon bonded sulphur and  
residual or unidentified sulphur . So these are some of the  forms o f sulphur .  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:31 )  
 And readily soluble sulphates also  we can see . So sulphur is usually taken  up by the plant , we 
know that is sulfate  ions concentration of 3 to 5 ppm of sulphate ion in the soil have been  found 
adequate for most of t he plant  growth and in sulphur deficient soil  easily soluble sulphate content 
lies between  5 to 10  ppm. However , the coarse texture soils  like sandy and sandy  loam soils 
contain sulphur less than 5 ppm.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:06 )  
 
So another form of sulp hur we can see it  is called adsorbed sul phates. So this , it contains higher 
amount of  hydrous oxides of iron and aluminum  like in case of ultisol , oxisols and alfisols. W e 
can see these adsorb  sulphates and  they contribute sulph ur requirement in  highly wea thered soils 
as you can see  they are present in oxisols and ultisols; these are highly weathered  soil so they 
contribute the sulphur  requirement in the highly weathered  soils.  
Concentration of sulphur found higher  at depths ranging from 15 to 75 centimete r below the 
surface and  absorb sulphate can account for  up to one third of the total in sub  soils and less than 
ten percent of the  total surface in the surface soil . So these are  some of the important  features of 
adsorbed sulfate .  (Refer Slide Time: 19:00)  
 
 
Also we can see co -precipitated , when it  is co-precipitate so we have already  discussed about this 
readily soluble  sulphate , adsorbed sulphates we have  discussed . Now the comfortable -precipitate  
with calcium carbonate , so let us see  what are the fe atures . So this form that is , this form of 
sulphur  can be or inorganic sulphur  can be mostly  found in calcareous  soil particularly when  
calcium carbonate is present as its  coarse particles .  
And this fraction is  relatively available to the plants . And anot her part is reduce  inorganic 
sulphur compounds ; so this  reduced inorganic sulphur compounds you  can see they can be observed as sulphide  form or elemental sulphur form . Now this  sulphide from we can see 
magnitude of  such accumulation may be greater in  salts containing higher amount of  organic 
matter . And elemental sulphur it  is an intermediate product of oxidation  process of sulphide .  
So we have discussed the major  inorganic forms like readily soluble  sulphates , adsorb sulphate , 
co-precipitated with calciu m carbonate and  reduced inorganic sulphur .  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:13 )  
 
So let us see the forms of , organic forms of sulphur . So the first  one is hydroiodic acid reducible 
sulphur . So the sulphur in this pool is  extracted using hydroiodic  acid. Out of  the total organic 
sulphur about half is  present in this form . And the second  fraction we can see is called the carbon  
bonded sulphur . So in this fraction  sulphur is determined by reduction to  sulphide with Raney 
nickel and this  fraction of sulphur  amount  abou t 20 percent of the total  organic sulphur .  
And the third  type of fraction of organic sulphur  is residual or unidentified sulphur . This account 
for 30 to 40 percent of  the total organic sulphur  and it is the  most stable form of sulphur . So 
these are some o f the important  organic forms of sulphur .  (Refer Slide Time: 21:08 )  
 
Now if you want to see what are the sources of  sulphur , sulphur occurs as a sulfide in  igneous 
and sedimentary rocks , we know  that. We have already discussed about  pyrite or FeS2. Now as 
the fertilizer  product  becomes more concentrated and  refined sulphur content become  very low . 
And the sulphur bearing minerals in the  rocks and soils are these .  
First of all , gypsum . Gypsum is calcium sulphate  dehydrate,  so apart from calcium it also  
supplies sulphur , then epsomite , mirabilite , pyrite ; we have  already discussed . FeS2, pyrite  and 
then chalcopyrite , cobaltite  and also galena . So all these are  important source of sulphur . So 
these are  basically sulphur bearing minerals which  are present i n rocks .  (Refer Slide Time: 22:12 )  
 
If we are interested to know what are  the major sources of sulphur  we already know that 95 
percent  of the sulphur  in the soil occurs  as inorganic form  and sulphur dioxide which is the 
gaseous  form of sulphur , we can see their  enrichment in the industrial areas , because of industrial 
emission  they go to the  atmosphere and this sulphur dioxide  goes to the atmosphere and 
ultimately , they react with  the with the water vapor to produce the acid  drain .   
And this acid drain  comes back to  the soil. So this acid  rain basically is sulphuric acid , so when  
the sulphur dioxide reacts with the  water vapor that produce  sulphur ic acid and comes back to 
the soil as acid  rain. Also sulphur can be present in irrigation  water as sulphate  sulphur and  cow 
and pig manure also compost and  poultry manure contains sulphur . So these  are some of the 
important sources of  sulphur .  (Refer Slide Time: 23:30 )  
 
So guys  let us wrap up this lecture  and in the next lecture we will discuss  some of the important 
sulphur  containing fertilizers and other  aspects of sulphur  and their importance for plant 
nutrition . We are going to discuss  their deficiency symptoms . So these are  some of the references 
for this lecture . Please go through these references .  
And if you find any difficulty please  feel free to post your question in the  forum and I will be 
more than happy to  answer your queries . So thank you . Let us meet in our next  lecture .  