Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agri cultur al and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Week 3  
Lecture  11 
Soil P and K Plant Nutrition  
Welcome friends to this NPTEL  online certification cours e of soil fertility and fertilizers. 
And we are going to start our week 3. And in our previous week , we have discussed about the 
soil nitrogen , and how it is important for plant nutrition.   
And in thi s week,  we are going to disc uss the soil phosphorus , and potassium for plant 
nutrition. So, this is our week 3, and we are going to start the lecture number 11. So, we 
already know that among different macronutrients , nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium are  
considered as the primary n utrients . Because they are r equired in  relatively larger amount 
than other nutrients , or other essential nutrients .  
Although , nitrogen is required  in relatively higher quantity, but also this phosphorus and 
potassium are also very  indispensable for t he gr owth of the plant . Both phos phorus and 
potassium are very important for the growth of the plant in that, in the sense that they provide 
the energy and also, they regulate all the enzymes which are required for the plant different 
metabolism , activitie s of the plant.  
(Refer Sli de Time : 2:01) 
 
So, today, we are going to start our discussion with phosphorus , and these are some of the 
topics which we are going to discuss . First of all , we are going to discuss what  is the function of phosphorus i n plants ? Then phosphorus cycle in soils . What are the forms of phosphorus in 
soil? Then phosphorus sorption and desorption . And then the phosphorus origin and nature 
which we are going to discuss . So, these are some of the concepts which we are  going to 
discuss in  this lecture.  
(Refer Sli de Time:  2:28) 
 
Apart from that, we are also , these are the keywords for this lecture , like phosphorus cycle 
herbivores, carnivores , adsorption, so rption, desorption . So, these are some of the keywords 
which we are going to see i n this lecture.  
(Refer Sli de Time : 2:41) 
 
Now, let us start with the phosphorus , basic overview of phosphorus . Phosphorus has 
generally three  forms , phosphorus pentoxide which is P2O5, burning form of phosphorus , and then meta phosphoric acid that is H PO3 when di ssolved in water , and ort hophosphoric 
acid that is when dissolved in warm  water . Plant generally absorb phosphorus in two major 
forms, one is primary orthophosphate , or H2PO4 minus , and other one is called the secondary 
orthophosphate ions or H PO4 2 minu s. Just like in case of nitrogen,  plant can absorb , plant 
can uptake the nitrate form , and ammonium form. Similarly  in case of phosphorus , plant can 
uptake only these two forms , H2PO4 minus and HPO4 2 minus .  
Three  replaceable H plus , of proton of this phos phoric acid combine  with calcium ion to form 
three  different combined salts of calcium and phosphorus resulting in different classes of 
phosphatic fertilizers , we are going to discuss this . But at the same time, at this time  we 
should remember that this is the  most important infor mation that plan t can absorb phosphorus 
in these two forms , H2PO4 minus and HPO4 2 minus . And the dominance of these two forms 
depends on the soil pH , which we are going to discuss .  
(Refer Sli de Ti me: 4:37) 
 
Now, phosphorus . What are the functio ns of phosp horus in pla nt? Now, phosphorus is found 
in plant as constituent of nucleic acid , then phospholipids , coenzyme  NAD and NADP , ATP , 
and other components. So, you can see that nucleic acid which is o ne of the major component 
of any biological syste m that is c onsist of phospho rus. ATP, which is known as the energy 
source also be made of phosphorus . So, whatever energy is required  for their plant growth 
and metabolism is basically  generated from the pho sphorus . Because, that the  energy plants  
get from  ADP and AT P conte nts phosphorus.  
Now, heavy concentration of phosphorus is found in meristematic region of actively growing 
plants , where it is involved in the synthesis of nucle oproteins. So, you can see that there is a wide im portance o f phosphorus as far as the plant m etabolism , plant and plant growth is 
concerned . Without phosphorus plan t cannot grow , and plant growth is stunted when there is 
a phosphorus deficiency.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 06:16) 
 
Now, if  we see how phosphorus influenced the  plant growth . Now, it is very much important 
for cell div ision , and development of new tissue . Without phosphorus , the cell division 
cannot occur , and also development of new tissue cannot also occur. And phosphorus is  also 
associated with complex energy  transformatio n in the pl ant. Adding phosphorus to soil low  in 
available phosphorus promotes root growth and winter  hardiness, and stimulates tillering,  and 
often has tens the ma turity .  
So, you can see that  if there is a  deficiency of phosphorus , all these important plan t growth 
processes will be hampered, which will  ultimately manifest  in the stunted growth of the plant. 
So, that is why phosphorus is a very important macronutrient as far as the plant growth , and 
metaboli sm is concerned.  (Refer Sli de Time: 07:37) 
 
Now, phosphorus  cycle just like in cas e of nitrogen cycle, we have seen the dynami cs of 
different forms of nitrogen in the soil , and how different processes are controlling the 
conversion of one form of nitrogen  into another form . In case of soil  also, we can se e the soi l 
phosphorus  cycle. No w, this phosphorus cycle is the biogeochemic al cycle , that describes the 
movement of phosphorus to the lithosphere, hydrosphere , and biosphere. So, this phosphorus 
cycle will  tell you how phosphorus can move be tween lithosphe re, hydro sphere , and 
biosphere. In other terms, it shows the dynamics of phosph orus between the lithosphere , 
hydrosphere , and biosphere , and governed by different processes.  
It differs from other biogeoch emical cycles, because it does not inclu de a gas ph ase. In case 
of nitrogen cycle , we have seen there are different gaseous ph ases specifically in case of 
volatilization , denitrification , different gaseous phases are involved. However, in case of 
phosphoru s cycle, there is no gas phase, because of  phosphor us high r eactivity, it exists in 
combined form of other elements. So, phosphorus easily combined with other elements like 
calcium, aluminium , and iron, and they exist in these forms in the earth , or in the  soil. (Refer Sli de Time: 09:34) 
 
Now, if y ou see this is a phosphorus cycle . In the phosphorus cycle, we can see  that there are 
different types of sources o f phosphorus, like animal manure  and biosolids. This is one of the 
important source of organic  phosphorus , and also plant residues , when they deco mpose, they 
can also add to the pool of organic phosphorus . Organi c phosphorus can consist of microbial 
forms, plant residue forms , and humus forms. So, once this organic phosphorus pool is 
created , that can mineralize to produce these primar y orthophosphate as well as secondary 
ortho phosphate ions, which are present in the soil solut ion. And plant can uptake these two 
forms from the soil solution.  
So, just like the mineralization of nitrogen, conversion of o rganic form of nitro gen to  
inorganic form here also  you can  clearly see, the conversi on of organic form of phosphorus to 
inorgani c form of phosphorus is known as phosphorus mineralization , and the opposite 
process , just like nitrogen  immobilization is als o known as phosphoru s immobilizat ion, 
which you can  see in g oing in this direction. So me of these phosphate for primary 
orthophosphate , and second ary orthophosphate ion , are leached away t hrough the leaching 
process. Of course, this is , this accounts for v ery minor fraction .  
And, these HPO4 2 minus, and H 2PO4 minu s are subjected to differe nt types of other 
sorption , desorption proces s, or weathering process . For example, you can see that apart from 
this organic source of phosphorus, these phosphorus ions l ike primary orthophosphate  ion, 
and secondary orth ophosphate  ion, in the soil solution can come  also from weathering of 
primary minerals. N ow, primary phosphorus minerals are known as appetites , we are going to discuss them these appetites . So, due to the weathering process, these appetites enrich the soil 
solution  by producing t hese HPO4 minus , and  HPO4 2 minus ions.  
So, these HPO4 minus , and HPO2 minus can subject to adsorption by different mineral 
surface like clays, iron,  aluminium  oxides , and carbonat es. So, they can be these clays , iron, 
and aluminium  oxides, or carb onates c an adsorb  these HP O4 minus , and H2PO4 minus 
present in the soil solution , or sometime they are also coming back to the soil solution by the 
desorption process. So, adsorpti on and desorption these are two opposite process . Throug h 
adsorption , these p rimary orthophosphate  ions, secondary orthophosphate  ions gets adsorbed 
onto the mineral surface . However , desorp tion process can converse that moves them back to 
again to so il solution .  
Also, these HPO4 minus, or primary ortho phosphate  ion, and second ary ortho phosphate ion 
can precipitate in the form of secondary compounds , or secondary minerals . What are the 
secondary minerals ? Like, calcium phosphate , iron phosphate, manganese  phosphate , and so 
on. So, these phosphate ion gets precip itated in calcium pho sphate, iron phosphate, and then 
aluminium phosphate , and then manganese phosphate , and so  depending on the soil pH and 
they became unavailable to the plant . Sometime when they dissolve after diss olving this  
phosphorus  can again come b ack to the  soil s olution.  
So, these are some of the processes  which governs the movement of phosphorus in the solid 
phase . Of course, phosphorus is also  susceptible to runoff an d erosion losses , and another  
pool, other pools of these  primary orthophosphat e, and sec ondary orthophosphate  ions are  
mineral fertilizer , and also atmospheric deposition So, when there is a crop harvest that 
creates the loss of phospho rus from the whole system. So, this is c alled that phosphorus 
cycle.  (Refer Sli de Tim e: 15:14) 
 
Now, rock starts out the phosphorus cycle , and when it rains, phosphates are removed from 
the rocks , and are spread out through both soils , and water. And , plants use a phosphate  ions 
from the soil , and phosphate moves f rom plants to animals when herbivores  eat plan ts and 
carnivores eat plants , or herbivores.  
(Refer Sli de Tim e: 15:41) 
 
Now, when animal dies, they release this organically bind phosphate in the ground , and they 
are decomposed by bact eria and fungi , and after this decomposition, this ph ospho rus goes t o 
the soil or release into the water . As the rocks are forming, they will either join with 
phosphate , or the phosphate will go into the roots of the plant and start the cycle over again , 
and this i s how this phosphorus moves from lithosp here to the soil, and also to the base , to the plant body , and so on so forth. So, this is how this phosphorus moves from one part of the 
ecosystem to another part.  
(Refer Sli de Tim e: 16:34) 
 
Now, what ab out the phosphor us sorption and desorption ? Now, phosphoru s sorption occurs 
when the ortho phosphates like primary orthophosphate , and secondary  orthophosphate bind  
tightly to soil particles. And , there are several factors which affect s this phosph orus sorption . 
Like soil mine ral type , like volcanic soils have the greatest p hosphorus sorption c apacity , and 
less weathered soils and organic soils have low phosphorus sorption capacities .  
Amount of clay also governs the phosphorus sorption . For example , as the amount of clay 
increases in  the soil, the phosphorus sorptio n capacit y increases . Temperature is a nother 
important factor of phosphorus sorption , the phosphorus sorption increases as temperature 
increases , and when there is a flooding that reduces  the phosphorus sorption. Because there is 
a cha nge of pH when there is a flooding, chang e of soil p H. (Refer Sli de Tim e: 17:41) 
 
Now, how these fo rce phos phorus dynamics govern by change , govern this, the whole 
dynamics of phosphorus availability is gove rned by the soil pH , we are going to discuss in 
our upcoming slides. Now, if we see the forms  of phosphorus , we can broadly classify th em 
into organic f orms, and in organic f orms. Now, in the organic f orms, you can see phytin,  
inositol phosphate, phospholip ids, nucleic acid, nucleotides , sugar phosphate s, and unknown 
forms o ut there.  
And all of these are very important for  the growth , and metabolism of the plant. Inorganic 
forms can be further divided into combined forms , and ionic forms . In case of ionic f orms, 
primary orthophosphate  ion, secondary orthophosphate  ion, and the  phosphate ion . And in 
case of combined forms , you c an see they can be combined with calcium, they can combine 
with iron and aluminium , or they can combine with silicate minerals. So, t hese are the broad 
classification of phosphorus forms in soil. (Refer S lide Time: 19:07) 
 
Now, what are the organic phospha tes? The organic phosphates in soils are derived 
secondarily by addition of organic matter to the soil t hrough the growth of plants and 
deposition of plant residues. The microorganisms synthesize organic  phosphate compound s, 
and eventually accumulate in the soil mixed with compounds derive d from plant tissue. So, 
what happens ? The microorganism basically synthesize the organic phosphat e compounds , 
and accumulate in the soil mixed with compounds derived fr om the plant tissue. T hese 
organic phosphate , or organic forms of phosphorus constitute 20  to 90  percent  of the total soil 
phosphorus .  
Remember, this is the major form . Just like in ca se of nitrogen, the major nitrogen forms are 
organic in nature, only v ery small fraction is inorganic in n ature. However, in case of 
phosphorus simi larly, 20 to 90  percent  of the tota l soil phosphorus remains in organic forms . 
Mineral soil containing less and peaty soils , or soils under pasture content more . The nature 
of abo ut 62 percent  of soil organic phosphorus is still unk nown. So, remember this is very 
important thing that , like f or nitrogen majority of  the most of the phosphorus which are 
present in the soil remains in organic form.  (Refer Sli de Tim e: 20:42) 
 
Now, if  we s ee this picture , or this photo,  we can clearly see what are the dynamics of 
phosphorus in the soil more clearly . So, you can see there is an animal manure,  and different 
types of s oil process that goes into the organic phosphorus. So, where mic robes and, soil 
biomass there is l iving  biomass , they are all containing these  organic forms of phosphorus , 
and from this organic form of phosphorus , mineralization occurs to produce the soil solution 
phosphorus in primary orthophosphate i on, and secondary  orthop hosph ate. This is the  
primary orth ophos phate , this is  secondary orthophosphate ion s.  
Sometime  immobilization occ urs, when these orthophosphate  ion again converts back into 
organic form s. Plant generally uptake from the soil solution , also ther e are inputs  from  plant 
residues and inorganic f ertilizers. So, they all come to the soi l solution, there will be leach ing 
of these phosphatic ions that is primary and secondary orthophosphate ions , these ions get 
adsorbed by clay minerals , or iron  alumini um oxides , and de sorbed again to the soil solutio n. 
They can precipi tate in the form of secondary p hosphatic minerals like calcium, iron , and 
aluminium phosphates , and also they can also these seco ndary  phosphorus minerals can also 
dissolve to form , to enri ch the soil  solution wi th this primary , and secondary o rthophosphate.   
And als o, these apatite minerals they are also , they can also weather  to form these primary 
and secondary orthophosp hate.  One thing is important that there is a clear linkage or 
dynamics  between t hese three  different  forms of , these three  different solid fractions were 
phosphorus, which  governs this phosphorus dynamic.  
So, you can see primary  P mineral , secondary P minerals , and sorbed  phosphorus by clay 
mineral s iron and aluminium  oxides , they have th eir no clos e relatio nship . So, phosphorus  is generall y cycle between these sorbe d, between these sorbed  phosphorus to secondary 
phosphorus minerals to primary phosphorus minera ls. So, this is how this phosphorus  moves 
between  these three  solid forms .  
(Refer Sli de Time: 23:41) 
 
So, if we consider the compound  of phosphates with calcium, we can see that these groups of 
compounds form an important category , these calcium phosph ates form an important 
category in the young soil , and in mature  soils of neutral to alkaline pH range . Because in  
case of neutral to alkaline pH range , calcium ion predominate.  
So, there it forms the calcium phosphates. So, the calcium phosphates found , or expected 
either in the stable state  or in a metastable state in the soil fertil izer re action zone,  and these 
are ge nerally , these like fluorapatite you can see where there is a fluorine presence , carbonate 
apatite when there is a carbonate , hydroxy  apatite when there is a hydroxyl ion , octacalcium 
phosphate, then di calciu m phosphate , and mono calcium phosphate  monohydrate . So, these 
are the major calcium compounds, calcium -based  phosphate compounds , or calcium 
phosphates which are formed in the neutral to  alkaline pH range.  (Refer Sli de Tim e: 24:52) 
 
And other , when  phosphate combin es with iron, aluminium , they produce the iron aluminium  
phosph ates, they are generally , crystals or colloids and surface precipitated or adsorbed.  
(Refer Sli de Tim e: 25:10 ) 
 
So, in the initial stage of acid w eathering, phosphate becomes increasingly boun d to iron, and 
aluminium ions released from silicate minerals by replacing the hydroxyl from hydroxyl 
group from the hydroxyl minerals , or oxygen from the oxide minerals . So, ferrous phosphate 
also known as Vivianite  has been detected in waterlogged , or po orly dr ained soil , and in 
profiles having fluct uating water and air regimes. So, in case of a cidic soil condition , you can 
expect the formation of iron phosphate , and al so aluminium phosphate , or wavellite  has also 
been detected in the sand and silt fracti on of som e soils.  (Refer Sli de Tim e: 25:55) 
 
And, in the presence of exc ess of potassium and ammonium ions, the alkali  phosphate s of 
iron and aluminium give rise to leucophosphite , tarana kite, and minyulite.  And in water free 
of the alkali ions, these co mpounds  free of the alkali ion,  these compounds  change  into stable 
variscite  and other str engite  minerals . And, the normal products of fossilization of igneous 
and other  alumin osilicate rocks belongs to these  isodi amorphous series such as variscite , that 
barrandite , strengite , and meta -variscite -clinobarrandite , and phospho sider ite, etcetera . So, 
these are some of the compounds which these phosphate  produce when they comb ine with 
aluminium and  iron.  
(Refer Sli de Tim e: 26:57) 
 Now, if you see the or igin, and nature  of soil phosphor us, soil phosphoru s exist in many 
primary , and secondary compounds , and apatite group  of primary minerals is the original 
source of about 95  percent  or more of the soil phosphorus. So, we have already discussed 
what is appet ite? This is th e primary minerals , and  these are the majo r source of soi l 
phosphorus, a random inclusion of phosphorus in sili cate minerals like z ircon occurs during 
the proce ss of crystallization, and the different phosphorus compounds in soil can be 
generally classed a s fluoro-carbonate , and hydro xy phosphates of iron , alumin ium, then 
titanium, manganese, calcium and magnesium . 
(Refer Sli de Tim e: 27:47) 
 
So, these are some o f the references which are used for this lecture. You please go ahead and 
read th ese references for more comprehensive idea about soil phos phorus. And  let us wrap up 
this lecture . And we  will continue from here , and then we  will discuss the other important  
aspects of soil phosphorus dynamics in our next lecture. Thank you . 