Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 24  
Soil Micronutrients and Their Role in Plant Nutrition  
Welcome friends to these 24th lecture of NPTEL online certification course of soil fertility 
and fertilizer s and we are at week 5 and in this week,  we are talking about soil micronutrients 
and their role in plant nutrition. And in the previous three lectures of this week, we have 
discussed about b asics of micronutrients, their deficiency symptoms and micronutrient cycle .  
What is the sufficiency and deficiency criteria of any nutrient ? What are the critical ranges 
we have discussed? Now, also we have discussed what are the soil conditions, which af fect 
the availability of various micronutrients. Now, in this lecture, we are going to cover these 
following concepts.  
(Refer Slide Time:  01:08)  
 
First of all, we are going to talk about the role of silicon in crops and also , we want to discuss 
the silico n compounds and their properties in the soil and then silicon  nutrition in rice and 
then we are going to discuss the remedy for micronutrient deficiencies. And finally, we want 
to discuss the management practices of soil bor on. So, these are the five major  concepts 
which we are going to discuss in this 24th lecture of week 5. (Refer Slide Time:  01:46)  
 
Now, talking about the keywords, these are the keywords which we are going to discuss, first 
of all we are going to discuss the silicon  deficiency , then ab iotic stress, then granular 
fertilizer , boric acid , boronated  NPK . So, these are some of the keywords of this lecture 24.  
(Refer Slide Time:  02:07)  
 
Now, if we go ahead and see what are the major properties of silicon in soil. N ow, silicon  is a 
major con stituent of earth crust with 28.8  percent  of total content. So, and also silicon is 
generally not considered as an essential element. Now, silicon is assimilated by plant root as 
monosilicic  acid, the formula of monosilicic  acid is H4SiO4.  It accumulates i n external layers 
below and above the cuticle of the leaves.  So, the silicon basically shows you know some accumulation below and above the cuticle of 
the leaf and silicon concentration in plants depends primarily on the phylogenetic position of 
the plant  more than on its environment like silicon concentration in the soil and soil solution , 
pH, so  more than these factors, the phylogenetic position of the plant governments the silicon 
concentration in the plan.  
(Refer Slide Time:  03:22)  
 
So, w hat are the r ules of silicon in crop? So, silicon plays a significant role in imparting 
biotic and abiotic stress resistance and enhancing their crop productivity. So, biotic and 
abiotic stress means, what are the abiotic stress ? Abiotic stress means high temperature i s an 
abiotic stress, drought condition is an abiotic stress .  
And biotic stress could be due to different types of biological process like peas disease and 
different types of  other problems, biological related problem these are biotic stresses. So, 
silicon  plays an important role in imparting the resistance against these biotic and abiotic 
stresses and ultimately, which helps in enhancing the crop productivity. It is also crucial in 
preventing or minimising the lodging in cereal crops, which is a matter of great importance in 
agricultural productivity .  
Most of you know a huge number of crop failures can be seen as a result of lodging of these 
cereal crops. Now, when plants lodge, they are their products cannot be used. So, for example 
rice. So, as a result of that, that silicon plays an important role for preventing this lodging of 
the cereal crops. In recent years silicon has been regarded as the quasi -essential element.  Although it is not an essential element but some, it is a recent time it has been rega rded as a 
quasi -almost essential element. So, rice is a , talking about different plants, which required the 
silicon , rice is a high silicon accumulator plant and has been demonstrated to be necessary for 
healthy growth and stable production and silicon has been recognised as an agronomically 
essential element in many countries like Japan.  
So, regardless whether silicon is essential or not, it has played an important role or it can play 
an important role for the ultimate growth of the plant by imparting the  resistance again the 
biotic , abiotic stress , and lodging.  
(Refer Slide Time:  05:56 ) 
 
 
Now, if we see the silicon compound distribution in the soil, now, silicon compound can be 
divided into two phases, one is a liquid phase and other is solid phase . In the liquid phase we can see monosilicic  acid, polysilicic acid , then complex es with inorganic compounds , silicon  
complex with inorganic compound and silicon complex with organic compounds and organo -
silicon compounds.  
So, these are the liquid phase of si licon. However, the solid phase of silicon can be again 
subdivided into amorphous phase and crystalline phase . Among them on first phase we can 
see biogenic forms of silicon like phytolith, silicon rich plants and microorganism. Whereas, 
in case of crystal line phase we can see finely dispersed mineral like mica, illite, smectite, 
kaolinite .  
All these are made of the silica tetrahedral sheet and in this silica tetrahedral sheet , silicon is 
the major component because one silica atom is surrounded by 4 oxyge n atom to develop 1 
silica tetrahedron and this silica tetrahedron linked together to form the silicon  tetrahedral 
sheet, which is an basic unit of clay mineral structure. Also, they can be seen as closely 
dispersed mineral essentially in the primary miner als like feldspers and quartz. So, these are 
the distribution of silicon in soil both in solid phase as well as in liquid phase.  
(Refer Slide Time:  07:40 ) 
 
Now, since a rice is an important plant that shows the silicon  nutrition, let us discuss, what 
are the important aspects of silicon  nutrition in rice. Now, rice is known as a silicon 
accumulator and the plant is benefited from this silicon  nutrition. So, silicon amended rice 
plants possess a varying degree of varying degrees of ability to tolerate a bi otic stress such as 
attack of insects , pest and fungal diseases and abiotic stress like toxicity of soil , aluminium, 
iron, manganese and excessive salts.  Now,  you know that when there is an excessive amount of aluminium that impact the root 
growth. So, a lso excessive amount of salt also create a huge amount of abiotic stress for any 
crop. So, the silicon amended rice plant can show their tolerance against these biotic and 
abiotic stresses. Now, recent studies suggest that that depletion of available silicon in soils 
under intensive rice cultivation is a reason for the reduction in rice yield.  
So, when there is an intensive rice cultivation since rice can hype accumulate this silicon in 
their body that those areas can show a reduction in the rice field. So , the mean depletion of 
available silicon  when there is a depletion of available silicon  in the in the rice field. Then we 
can see the depletion or reduction in their yield also. So, that shows the importance of silicon 
for rice yield , so, the plants grow without silicon or under low silicon or deficiency 
conditions show yellowing or browning of lower leaves with necrotic spots.  
Also , they show poor tillering wilted and rightly tapes and small panicles with high stability. 
So, these are some of the disadva ntages of silicon deficiency. So, when we can see silicon  
deficiency in rice, these are some of the symptoms like yellowing and browning of the lower 
leaves with necrotic spots , poor tillering , wilting , drying of the leaf tips and small panicles 
with high stability. So, ultimately the yield goes down drastically.  
(Refer Slide Time:  10:26)  
 So, as I have mentioned so, silicon deficiency in the rice leaves can show in terms of soft and 
droopy appearance causing mutual shading and reducing photosynthetic eff iciency also, that 
silicon deficiency can lower the starch formation and accumulation of the starch which will 
lead to a yield reduction of course, when there is a starch production that will lead to yield 
reduction and also we can see occurrences of disea ses such as blast and brown spots when 
there is a widespread silicon deficiency .  
Reduced number of panicles per metre , per square metre per area and reduce percentage of 
filled grains are also important symptoms of silicon deficiency . As a result, the ult imately the 
yield of the crop goes down.  
(Refer Slide Time:  11:27)   
 
Now, what are the causes of silicon deficiency ? There are several causes of silicon  
deficiency . First of all, soil parent material contain inadequate quantity of available silicone. 
So, if the silicone , if the parent material of the soil containing adequate quantity of available 
silicon that can create silicon deficiency . When soluble silicon is continuously leached out in 
strongly awaited soil that can also create silicon  deficiency in the soil. Also, a long period of 
intense cultivation depletes available soil silicone. So, these are some of the reasons for 
silicon deficiency in soil.  (Refer Slide Time:  12:13)  
 
Now, what are the factors which are responsible for availability of silica in rice ? So, if we can 
see that so, silicon  occurs in soils as crystalline and amorphous silica , we have already seen 
that as silicates  adsorbed or coprecipitated with hydrous oxides of aluminium, iron and 
manganese and as silica  dissolved in the soil so lution. So, these are some of the forms 
through which we can see the occurrence of silica .  
Now, the silica  concentration in the solutions of submerge soil increases slightly after 
flooding and then decreases gradually. Now, after several months of sub merg ence, the 
concentration may be lower than that at the start.  So, we can see that the silicon  concentration 
in the submerge condition of ri ce first initially increases after the flooding and then decreases 
gradually and after several months .  
We can see the  concentration of the silicon in the soil goes down then that at the start of  the 
of the growth of the plant. N ow, the increase in concentration after flooding may be due to 
the release of silica  following couple of condition first of all, the reduction of  hydrous oxides 
of ferric sorbing silica. So, when the ferric ion, the hydrous oxides of ferric ion get reduced to 
ferrous as a result of submergence.  
So, in that case whatever silica  was sorbed previously, they can come into the soil solution 
and enrichi ng the soil solution that can be a reason of increasing the silicon concentration just 
after flooding and also action of carbon dioxide on alumino -silicate. So, the subsequent 
decrease when we can see the after the submergence there is a sudden increase an d then 
subsequent decrease.  So, the subsequent decrease may result from recombination with alumina -silicates  following 
the reduction of reduction in partial pressure of carbon dioxide. So, when there is a 
submergence of course, the  (())(14:48 ) the reducti on partial pressure of carbon dioxide goes 
down and then there is a recombination with alumina -silicates,  ultimately, the silicon 
availability goes down. So, this is how the silicon can get available just after the flooding and 
then their availability goes  down.  
(Refer Slide Time:  15:08)  
 
And now what is the what can be the  rate of application of silicon  so the rate of application of 
silicon source may depend on its chemical and physical nature and soil factors. Now 
generally 1 to 2 tonnes per hectare of c alcium silica te slag may be adequate for lowland rice 
grown. In case of lowland rice zone generally we can apply 1 to 2 tonne s per hectare of 
calcium silica te slag.  
What are the time and methods of application ? Now about two thirds of the silicon in the 
whole rice plant and nearly three fourths of the silicon in the leaf blades are absorbed during 
the reproduction or reproductive stage and the absorption of silica  starts from transplanting 
and continue to the flowering stage. So, you have to adjust your ap plication based on these 
steps.  (Refer Slide Time:  16:04)   
 
Now, what are the strategies to mitigate the micronutrient deficiencies in the plants? So , this 
flowchart gives an comprehensive understanding of how to deal with , mitigate or mitigate the 
micronutrient deficiency in the plant , we can see the management of micronutrient base 
should be based on supply and also demand. Now, demand of these micronutrients based on 
types of crop need of the crop and also the yield target . What is our target yield ?  
And of course, that demand the difference between supply and demand should be considered 
for management of the micronutrient. Now supply of the micronutrient can be achieved by 
indigenous nutrient supply capacity of the soil. And it is also governed by sta tus of nutrient 
deficiency and ecosystem environment. We have already discussed several factors in the soil 
which governs the micronutrient availability.  
So, these factors also influence the type of the crop need of the crop and yield target. 
Ultimately , we can get, ultimately for management of this micronutrient, we need to do 
manipulation in agronomic techniques and also growing of tolerant crops that means those 
crops which can tolerate this micronutrient deficiency . Also, we should apply manure and 
fertilizer  and of course, with proper method, time of application , rate source and frequency. 
So, these are some of the ways to which micronutrient can be managed in the soil.  (Refer Slide Time:  17:58 ) 
 
Now, what are the remedies for micronutrient deficien cies? Now, of course, there are 4 major 
remedies one is application to fertilizer s. Secondly, tailoring management practices which are 
suitable for the plant and organics , application of organics , and selection of tolerant varieties. 
So, these are the 4 major strategies to compensate or to correct the micronutrient deficiency 
in the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:31)  
 
Now , applications with application with mixed fertilizer  also an important aspect of 
micronutrient fertilisation.  So, generally, these micronut rient fertilizer s are mixed with 
micronutrients are mixed with mixed fertilizer s. So, generally incorporation sometimes they 
are incorporated in the with the granular fertilizer . So , this incorporation during manufacturing results in uniform distribution o f micronutrients throughout granular NPK 
fertilizer .  
So, these micro tests can be mixed with the granular NPK fertilizer , so that we can get a 
uniform and uniform distribution of the micronutrients throughout these granular fertilizer s. 
Also, bulk blendin g with granular fertilizer  can be another way. Now this produces fertilizer  
grades that provide the recommended micronutrient rates. Unfortunately, nutrient segregation 
is common, resulting in uneven nutrient distribution.  
So, the bulk blending with granu lar fertilizer  can be made to get the recommended 
micronutrient rate. However, that distribution of nutrient is uneven.  The third way is coating 
onto granular fertilizer s. So , coating powder, powdered micronutrient onto granular fertilizer , 
NPK fertilizer  decreases the possibility of segregation and finally mixing with fluid fertilizer . 
So, mixing micronutrients with fluid fertilizer  has become a popular application method. So, 
these are some of the ways through which we can apply the micronutrients to the crop.  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:11)  
 
Now , remember that whenever we apply any nutrient to the crop, we generally follow the 4R 
concept. So , 4R basically says right product , right time, right place , and right rate. So , right 
product indicates we have to match the fertilizer  and other sources of nutrients to crop needs 
right time means we have to make the nutrients available when crop needs them. W e do not 
need to make it available all the time we can only make it available when crop needs them.  
Right place , keep nutrients where crops can use them and finally , right rate match amount of 
fertilizer  to crop needs.  So, whenever we devise any plan to increase the availability of any fertilizer , irrespective of whether it is a macro fertilizer, macronutrient fertiliz er or 
micronutrient fertilizer , we should always keep in mind this 4R concept.  So, same for our 
concept is also applicable in case of micronutrients.  
(Refer Slide Time:  21:19)  
 
Now, there are two philosophies of micronutrient fertilisation one is insuran ce philosophy , 
another is prescription -based philosophy. Now, insurance -based philosophy basically 
depends on prophylactic measures or maintenance schedule. So, prophylactic measures 
means when we anticipate some problem and we go for the initial applicati on to offset that 
anticipated problem and prescriptive approach  is which is based on the soil and plant 
analysis, which prevents the unnecessary application. So, these are two philosophies on 
micronutrient fertilisation.  (Refer Slide Time:  22:01)  
 
The m ethods of application can be of 3 types one is soil, majorly micronutrient fertilizer s are 
applied either to soil or foliar application or by dipping the seedling  or coating the seeds. So, 
these are the three methods of micronutrient fertilizer  application  in the soil .  
(Refer Slide Time:  22:23 ) 
 
What are the advantages of foliar spray?  So, foliar spray first of all, the first advantage of 
foliar spray , it is it require lower rate th an soil application. Secondly foliar spray  ensures 
uniform distribution. A nd thirdly, in case of foliar spray, the response is always almost 
immediate as compared to the soil application because you are  directly applying the fertilizer  
on to it the crop surface. So, these are some 3 advantages of foliar spray.  (Refer Slide Tim e: 23:06)  
 
However, at the same time, there are several disadvantages of foliar spray . First of all, leaf 
burn may occur if the salt concentration of the spray is too high. So, when these are, when we 
apply these micronutrients, these are basically micron utrients salts , basically sulphates so, 
sometimes sulphates and all these things. So, when you apply these salts, if their 
concentration of the salts are too high, that can cause leaf burn .  
Secondly, nutrient demand often is high, when the plants are smal l, then the leaf surface is 
insufficient for foliar absorption. So, what happens when the leaf surface is small when the 
plants are small and then when the nutrient demand is high, but the plant is small. So, the leaf 
surface which is insufficient, which b ecomes insufficient for foliar application because we 
cannot give the recommended dose to those small or limited leaf surface which is required 
because in that case nutrient demand will be high.  
So, again when there is a high nutrient demand, but the plant  is small, so, of course the leaf 
surface will be also limited. So, along this leaf surface , we using this leaf surface spray , foliar 
spray, we cannot meet the high nutrient demand of the crop. And third one is maximum 
yields may not be possible if sprayin g is delayed until deficiency symptoms appear. So, that 
is another disadvantage because once the deficiency symptoms appear, even if you give the 
foliar application but you will not get the maximum yield . 
Of course, there is a little residual effect from f oliar sprays also and application costs have are 
higher if more than one spray is needed unless they can be combined with pesticide spray 
application. So, generally this foliar spray is generally combined with pesticide applications so, that the applicatio n cost can be minimised otherwise, if you have to spray solely for the 
micronutrient fertilizer  that can increase the application cost and cost of cultivation.  
So, that is another disadvantages of foliar spray. So, keeping in these all these in mind and we  
have to identify the best practice , management practice and application practice of 
micronutrient fertilizer s.  
(Refer Slide Time:  26:08)   
 
Now, let us see some micronutrient fertilizer s with nutrient content, we can see here, boron, 
which is borax and s olubor and you can see we in case of borax, the boron concentration is 
10.5 percent  in case of solubor is 19  percent  in case of copper , copper sulphate pentahydrate 
is 24  percent , iron, iron sulphate heptahydrate is 19  percent  iron, Fe-EDDHA is 6 percent  
iron, manganese is manganese sulphate trihydrate that is 30.5  percent , molybdenum is 
ammonium molybdate this 52  percent  of molybdenum and zinc is zinc sulphate heptahydrate 
21 percent , zinc and zinc EDTA that is 12  percent  of zinc. So, these are the micronu trient 
fertilizer s which we generally apply.  (Refer Slide Time:  27:01)   
 
 
So, commonly used boron fertilizer  if we talk about boron, borax is a commonly used boron 
fertilizer  which 10.5 , granubor with 15 to 17  percent  of boron , solub or 19 to 20  percent , boric 
acid 20.5  percent , boron ated NPK 0.3  percent , and boronated single super phosphate it 
contains boron traces, it contains 0.15 to 0.20  percent  of boron.  (Refer Slide Time:  27:31 )  
 
There are some fortified fertilizer s approved in India under fertilizer  control order. So, these 
are mentioned here like zincated urea, zincated phosphate, which is in the form of suspension 
zincated NPK. So, the NPK is here and the zinc is 0.5  percent  and zinc at NPK at 12 , 32, 16, 
0.5. Boron ated NPK and 0.3  percent  boron, boronated  NPK 10 , 26, 26, 0.3, boronated single 
super phosphate which contains 16  percent  phosphorus and then 21 percent calcium and 0.2  
percent  boron and boron ated DAP which contains 18  percent  nitrogen , 46 percent  P25 and 0  
percent  K2 and 0.3  percen t of boron. So, these are the fortified fertilizer s which are approved 
under fertilizer  control in order , fertilizer  control order in India so,  these fertilizer s are also 
very popular .  
(Refer Slide Time:  28:38) 
 Methods and rate a boron application we ca n see that when we apply borax or solub or we can 
apply one to 1.5 kg per hectare of boron , in case of foliar we can apply boric acid from 0.2 to 
0.5 kg per hectare of boron.  
(Refer Slide Time:  28:54)  
 
Now management practices of soil boron we can see the re are 3 management practices one is 
liming and then time scheduling and manuring these are the three ma nagement practices of 
soil boron .  
(Refer Slide Time:  29:05)  
 
Due to poor special distribution of boron bulk blends containing boron salts are less eff ective 
than co -granulated products and the use of highly soluble boron sources can results in leaching losses in high rainfall environments and slow -release sources have the most 
potential to supply adequate boron throughout the entire plant cycle or multi ple crops cycle.  
(Refer Slide Time:  29:32)  
 
Now, why boronated NPK or SSP are introduced . There are two reason , first of all to apply 
the boron at very low cost and to obtain the uniform distribution over the field. So, these are 
the reason behind these coordinated NPK or boronated SSP are introduced for micronutrient 
fertilisation.   (Refer Slide Time:  29:53)  
 
So, guys, we have completed this lecture and these are the references please go through , 
please go through these references and if you have any d oubt just feel free to ask your 
question in the forum and we will  be more than happy to answer your queries . Thank you 
very much . 