Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture:  26 
Soil Testing  and Soil Fertility  Evaluation  Methods  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:21)  
 
Welcome  frien ds to this NPTEL  online  certification  course  of Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers . 
And,  we are going  to start today  week  6 and the topic  of week  6 of lectures  is soil testing  and 
soil fertility  evaluation  methods.  So, in our previous  five weeks,  we have  discu ssed about  the 
basics  of soil fertility . We have  discuss ed about  soil health  indicators  and also we have 
discussed  in details  about  several  macronutrients  and micronutrients,  we have  discussed  their 
sources,  we have  discussed  their roles  and deficiency  symptoms.   
Now,  in this week,  we are going  to discuss  a very important  aspect  of how to determine  or 
evaluate  the soil and crop nutritional  status  using  different  methods,  how to ensure  that, we 
can recommend  proper  fertilization  for maintaining  the growth  of the plant . So, in this lecture  
26 that is first lecture  of this week  6 we are going  to discuss  these  following  concepts.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:35)  
 
So, these  are the following  concepts  of this lecture  we are going  to first cover  soil fertility  and 
produ ctivity.  Then  we are going  to discuss  Liebig’s law of minimum  and then we are going  
to discuss  law of diminishing  return.  Also  we are going  to discuss  Mitscherlich  equation  and 
also we are going  to discuss  soil fertility  evaluation  methods  and plant  analys is and tissue  
testing.  So, these  are the concepts  which  we are going  to cover  in this lecture.   
Remember  this basics  of soil fertility  productivity  Liebig’s  law of minimum , law of 
diminishing  return , Mitscherlich’s  equation  we have  already  discussed  in our previous  
lectures,  however,  we will be doing  a quick  recap  or quick  recall  of these  concepts,  before  we 
discuss  about  soil fertility  evaluation  methods,  because  we need  to remember  these  terms  
before  we can understand  different  soil fertility  evaluation  methods.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  2:37)  
 
So, apart  from  these  concepts,  these  are the following  some  of the keywords  which  we are 
going  to discuss  in this lecture  of fertility , then hidden  hunger , then tissue  testing,  then critical  
nutrient  concentration,  DRIS chart  all these  things  are included  in this lecture  and we are 
going  to discuss .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  2:57)  
 
So, if we recall  what  is soil fertility  and productivity  and what  is the difference  between  these  
two terms,  you should  remember  or you should  recall that soil fertility  is the potential  of earth  
or soil or it is an inherent  capacity  of the soil to supply  plant  nutrients  in quantity  forms  and 
proportion  required  for the growth  and development  of the crop.   So, basically  soil fertility  defines  the soil capacity  to maintain  the supply  of essential  plant  
nutrients.  So, that for ensuring  the growth  and development  of the crop.  However,  if we 
consider  soil productivity,  productivity  is defined  as the capacity  of the soil to produce  plants  
under  specified  program  of management.   
So, the basic  difference  between  soil fertility  and productivity  is, productivity  is measured  in 
terms  of produce  or in other  words  crop growth  or crop produce.  So, in general  productivity  
is measured  by the yield  of the crop per unit area of the land.  However,  soil fertility  is the 
capacity  of the soil to supply  the plant  nutrients  in adequate  quantity.   
Now,  remember  that fertility  is one of the factors  of soil productivity  not both these  terms  are 
same,  because  soil productivity  also depends  on climatic  properties  as well as management  
practices.  Remember  that sometimes  soil may be fertile  but may not be productive.  There  
may be different  types  of abiotic  stress  that can result  in unproductiveness  of a soil or that can 
lead a soil to be unproductive.   
So, it means  that a productive  soil is always  fertile.  However,  a fertile  soil may not be always  
productive  this very important  concept.  So, we have  already  discussed  this productivity  and 
fertility  however,  this is we are discussing  this again  because  this will be required  for this 
lecture  for understanding  the concept  of plant  and soil fertility  evolution  methods.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  5:34)  
  
Also,  if you remember  Liebig’s law of minimum  which  you have  already  discussed . The 
Liebig’s  law of minimum  says that the growth  or yield  of a crop is limited  by that factor  
which  is present  in the relatively  least amount.  So, when  there  are multiple  nutrients  or factor  
which  are affecting  the proper  growth  of the plant,  then the growth  of the plant will be 
governed  by the least available  factor  or nutrient  for example,  here we can see a good  
example.   
Suppose,  here there  are two different , three  different  nutrients  nitrogen , phosphorus , 
potassium  and requirement  for growth  of the crop is 100 units of nitrogen , 50 units of 
phosphorus  and 60 units  of potassium.  However,  if we see the availability  of these  nutrients,  
we can we can see that, we can see that the nitrogen  is available  in 40 percent.   
So, we can see 40 percent  availability  of nitrogen  and 50 percent  availability  of phosphorus  
and 50 percent  availability  of potassium.  So, comparing  all these  three  we can say that the 
nitrogen  is the most  limiting  factor  for the plant  growth.  So, in this condition  nitrogen  is 
considered  as the most  limiting  factor.   
Now,  Liebig  remember  was the probably  the first to express  the yield  as a mathematical  
function  of the given  growth  factor  when  other  factors  are kept constant  formula  that is y 
equal  to Ax minus  B where  A and B are constant.  So, yield  we can see this can be governed  
by this equation  where  A and B are constant.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  7:46)  
 
Now,  Liebig  is known  as the father  of modern  agricultural  chemistry  and just as the capacity  
of the for example,  here you can see that the yield  is governed  by if we consider  the yield  is 
represented  by this bucket  of water.  So, the capacity  of this wooden  bucket  to hold water  is 
determined  by the height  of the shortest  stave . So, crop yields  are also restricted  by the new 
trend  in the shortest  supply.  We already  know  that, but just a quick  recall.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  8:27)  
 
Now,  also we know  what  is the law of diminishing  return  we know  that law of diminishing  
returns  says where  increase  in yield  of a crop per unit of available  nutrient  decreases  as the 
level  of available  nutrient  approaches  sufficiency.  So, the increase  in yield  by a unit increment  of the deficient  factor  is proportional  to the decrement  of that factor  from  the 
maximum.   
So, we can see that when  we are increasing  the, when  we are increasing  the available  
nutrients  suppose  in the x axis from  X to 2X to 3X the amount  of increase  in the yield  of the 
crop per unit increase  of these  available  nutrients  will decrease  as you can see, as a level  of 
available  nutrient  approach  sufficiency.  So, this is the law of diminishing  returns  we have  
already  known  that.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  9:25)  
 
So, finally,  we also know  there  is a Mitscherlich’s  equation  where  dy by dx equal  to A minus  
y into C and by integration  we can get y equal  to A 1 minus  10 to the power  minus Cx or log 
of A minus y equal  to log of A minus  Cx. Now,  these  immobile  nutrients  follow  what  are the 
immobile  nutrients  in the soil?  
Phosphorus , potassium , calcium  are the immobile  nutrients  in the soil. Those  nutrients  follow  
the Mitscherlich’s  concep t and according  to this Mitscherlich’s  equation,  we can understand  
that the yield  which  is denoted  by dy per unit available  nutrient  which  is denoted  by dx 
decreases  as the current  yield  which  is denoted  by y approaches  a maximum  yield  that is A 
with C being the proportionality  constant.  So, this is Mitscherlich’s  equation,  we have  already  
discussed  this, so, I am not going  to discuss  this further.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  10:22)  
 
Now,  let us discuss  some  of the important  concept  that is soil fertility  evaluat ion. Now,  there  
are several  techniques,  we generally  employ  to assess  the fertility  status  of the soil, what  are 
these  techniques?  There are 5 major  techniques,  first of all nutrient  deficiency  symptoms  of 
the plant.  Secondly,  plant  analysis  and tissue  testing, third  is methods  involving  growing  the 
higher  plants  on microorganisms,  fourth  one is soil chemical  analysis  and fifth one is isotopic  
dilution  methods.  So, we are going  to discuss  these,  these  evaluation  methods.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:05)  
 
So, before we discuss  the other  methods,  let us also discuss  the nutrient  deficiency  symptoms.  
Now,  you already  know  that there  is all the crops  when  there  is a deficiency  of a particular  nutrient  they show  not only the deficiency  symptoms,  but also subsequent  yield reduction,  we 
know  that. 
Now, there  is a term called  hidden  hunger.  So, this hidden  hunger  is a term used to describe  a 
plant  that shows  no obvious  symptoms  see it the nutrient  content  is not sufficient  to give the 
profitability.  So, when  the nutrient  content  is not sufficient,  but still when  the plant  is not 
showing  any visible  symptom  that is called  hidden  hunger.   
Now,  remember  that in case of hidden  hunger,  this can be represented  by this graph  we can 
see, when  we are increasing  the fertilizer  amoun t in the x axis and we can see the increase  in 
the yield  in the y axis, we can see up to a certain  level  we can see symptom  this is a clear  
deficient  symptoms.  And of course,  when  there  is insufficient  amount  of nutrient,  we can see 
that there  is an optimu m growth.   
However,  in between  these  optimum  nutrient  concentration  and the deficient  nutrient  
concentration,  these  hidden  hunger  lies. So, these  zone  is showing  the hidden  hunger  when  
the plant  is not showing  any visible  symptoms,  but at the same  time,  the nutrient  content  is 
less than the optimum  content.  So, these  are the nutrient  deficiency  symptoms.  So, why 
identifying  the hidden  hunger  is a problem?   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:52)  
 
Now,  detecting  the hidden  hunger  for a crop is always  a problem  as yield  goals rise and 
higher  profits  are sought . So, in this zone  with no symptoms  to guide  us, one must  return  to 
more  diagnostic  chemistry  to evaluate  the needs  for more  accurate  way.  So, hidden  anger  
detection  is always  a challenging  method  when  higher  profits  are sought  and when  the goals  of the yield  I mean  the when  the yield  goals  the targeted  yield  arise. So, we need  to go 
towards  the diagnostic  chemistry  based  methods.  So, testing  plants  and soil health  plan or 
modify  the plant  nutrient  program  to avoid  this problem  in subsequent  crops.  So, what  are the 
ways  to deal with this problem  with hidden  hunger?   
You can see here we can go either  with the field trials,  we can go for the plant  analysis , part 
analys is, soil test, root absorption  and then morphological  examination , field values  and then 
tissue  tests.  So, all these  different  other  tests are there  are available  when  this when  
identification  of the hidden  hunger  is a problematic  issue.  So, we will discuss  them  one by 
one.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:22)  
 
So, let us discuss  the first one that is plant  analysis  and tissue  testing.  So, this testing  is based  
on the concept  that if the content  of a particular  nutrient  in the plant  is high,  the higher  its 
availability  in the soil. So, when  the concentration  is high inside the plant,  we assume  that 
that nutrient  may be present  in higher  quantity  in the soil.  
So, tissue  testing  in case of plant  tissue  testing,  the only unassimi lated  portion  is measured.  
So, in one case,  there  are two ways  we want  is the plant  parts  are chopped  up and extracted  
with different  reagents  and then the intensity  of the color  developed  is compared  with 
standards  and used as a measure  of the supply  of the nutrient.   
So, what  do you do? We chop  this plant  parts  and then we digest  on extract  and then we 
develop  the color  and then we measure  the intensity  of the color  as the to indicate  the nutrient  
concentration  this is one approach.  Second  approach  is plant  is transferred  to filter  paper,  but you know  transfer  to filter  paper  by squeezing  the plant tissue  with pliers.  And in this 
method,  we can measure  the nitrogen,  phosphorus  and potassium  tests we can measure  with 
various  reagents.  So, these  are some  of the ways  to which  we can do the tissue  testing.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:45)  
 
Now,  in case of plant analysis,  remember  that both assimilated  and unassimilated  elements  
are measured  and plant grown  in the soil is first ashed  and the different  nutrient  elements  are 
estimated  I told you that it has to be digested  with different  types  of digestion  mixtu re and 
then we measure  the different  elemental  content  in this in the plant  part by different  methods,  
there  is a fundamental  relationship  between  the content  of a plant  nutrient  and the growth  or 
yield  of the plant.  Now,  in contrast  to the soil analysis,  tissue  analysis  reflects  nutrient  uptake  
conditions  of the soil.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  16:28)  
 
So, if we talk about  the tissue  test, what  are the important  consideration ? The first important  
consideration  is the plant  part to be selected.  In general,  the conductive  tissue  of the latest  
mature  leaf is used for testing  when  we are go for plant  tissue  analysis.  So, we will take the 
mature  latest  mature  leaf and the connective  tissue  from  those  mature  latest  mature  leaf for 
plant  tissue  testing,  what  is the time of testing ?  
The most  critical  stage  of growth  for tissue  testing  is from  the time of bloom  to early  fruiting  
stage.  Remember  that nitrate  concentration  is usually  higher  in the morning  than in the 
afternoon  if the supply  is short.  So, these  are all impo rtant consideration  when  we sample  the 
plant  tissue  for successive  estimation  of the nutrient.   
So, what  are the important  test? For example,  in case of nitrate,  we go with the 
Diphenylamine  based  method , in case of phosphate  analysis  we go with the Molybd ate plus 
Stannous  oxalate  test and in case of potassium  we go with this sodium  cobaltinitrite  test. So, 
these  are some  of the tissue  tests we generally  measure  the nutrients  which  are there  within  
the plant  body  to assess  the fertility  status  of the soil.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  17:59)  
 
Now,  how to interpret  the tissue  test results ? Critical  nutrient  concentration  ranges  or 
sufficiency  ranges  you already  know  these  concepts,  the critical  range  concept  and our 
critical  nutrient  concentration  range  or we call it CNC apart  from  that we can also use plant  
analysis  as a diagnostic  tool or we can use DRIS  concept  that is diagnostic  and 
recommendation  integrated  system  and fourth  one is crop logging.  So, these  are the four 
methods  we can use for interpreting  the tissue test results.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:40)  
 
So, we all know  that the CNC  or critical  nutrient  concentration  concept,  we have  already  
discussed  this previously,  but just for a quick  recap,  we can see in this graph  in the x axis, we 
are putting  the concent ration  of the nutrient  in tissue  in dry bases  and in the y axis we are putting  the growth  in you know  of the plant.  So, we can see as the concentration  of the 
nutrient  is increasing,  you will see there  is an increase  in the plant  growth  and there  will be a 
threshold  where  after where  you can see that there  will be not much  increase  in the growth  as 
you increase  the concentration.   
Now , the concentration  that is just adequate  for maximum  growth  or the level  of a nutrient  
below  which  crop yield  and quality  is unsatisfactory  is known  as the critical  concentration  of 
the nutrient  and this critical  concentration  of the nutrient  is very important  concept  for 
developing  the fertilizer  recommendation  because  we want  our you know  soil fertility  or the 
concentration  of the nutrient  in the tissue  should  be above  this critical  concentration  to ensure  
the proper  and optimum  growth  of the crop.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:00)  
 
Now , the second  way is the using  plant  as a diagnostic  tool the plant  analysis  is a diagnostic  
tool. So, the relationship  between  the nutrient  content  and the nutrient  availability  in the soil 
generally  follows  an asymptotic  curve,  what  is asymptotic  curve?  This means  that above  the 
critical  nutrient  level  in the plant  only small  changes  in plant  nutrient  content  may occur  
despite  marked  increase  in nutrient  availability  in the soil.  
So, in this graph,  you can see in the x axis we are putting  the nutrient  concentration  in the soil 
solution  and in the y axis we are getting  nutrient  content  in the plant.  So, if we consider  this 
the critical  level,  so, you can see from  this critical  level  to this content,  when  we increase  the 
nutrient  concentration  in the soil solution.   So, this difference  basically  shows  that the changes  in the soil nutrient  concentration  
however,  the corresponding  change  in the plant  nutrient  content  is comparatively  small.  So, 
that shows  that it is an asymptotic  curve.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:14)  
 
Now,  the third  concept  is DRIS  concept  that is diagnostic  and recommendation  integrated  
syste m. Now,  what  is DRIS ? In DRIS  generally  we consider  not only the limiting  nutrient  but 
also their ratios.  So, DRIS  is a basically  new approach  to interpret  leaf or plant  analysi s, 
which  was first developed  by Beaufils  in 1973  and named  as diagnostic  and recommendation  
integrated  system  or DRIS .  
So, what  is DRIS?  DRIS  is basically  a comprehensive  system  that identifies  all the nutritional  
factors , limiting  crop production  and increases  the chances  of obtaining  high crop yield  by 
improving  fertilizer  recomme ndation.  So, it consider  all the important  nutritional  factors  
before  going  for the fertilizer  recommendation.   
Now,  this DRIS  method  uses nutrient  ratios  instead  of absolute  and or individual  nutrient  
concentration  for interpretation  of tissue  analysis.  So, here you will see, we are not using  
individual  nutrient  concentration  rather  we are using  N by P, P by K, N by K ratios.  So, the 
nutrient  with positive  in this index  says appear  to be in the excess  and nutrients  with the 
negative  indexes  appear  to be deficient  in plants.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  22:58)  
 
So, to develop  a DRIS  for a crop the following  requirements  must  be made.  So, all factors  
suspected  of affecting  crop yield  must  be defined  and the relationship  between  these  factors  
and yield  must  be descri bed. And thirdly,  we have  to develop  the calibrated  norms  and 
finally,  recommend ations  suited  to particular  set of condition  and based  on correct  and 
judicious  use of this norm  must  be continually  refined.  So, these  are the important  concepts  
of DRIS .  
(Refer Slide  Time:  23:38)  
 
Now,  let us see some  examples.  So, a qualitative  reading , there  is a DRIS  chart  we are going  
to see in this coming  slide.  So, in this DRIS  chart  the qualitative  reading  can be done  by using  arrows  in the following  conventional  mann er. So, you can see there  is a horizontal  arrow  
which  shows  the values  within  the inner  circle  of the chart.   
Secondly,  you can see some  diagonal  arrows  for values  between  the two circles,  we are going  
to see two circles , two concentrating  readings  and there will be vertical  arrows  for values  
found  beyond  the outer  circle.  So, let us see an example  where  we can see these  falling  values  
we got from  the analysis  of the third  leaf blade of sugarcane.   
So, we got 2.34 percent  of nitrogen , 0.39 percent  of phosph orus,  1.17 percent  of potassium.  
So, obviously,  we can get N by P ratio equal  to 6, N by K equal  to 2 and K by P equal  to 3. 
So, how to use these  N by P, N by K, K by P ratios  in the DRIS  concept.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:52)  
 
So, here this is the DRIS  chart and you can see the chart  is having  three  axis for N by P axis 
and then you can see N by K axis and K by P axis respectively  with the mean  value  for the 
sub population  of high yielders  located  at the point  of intersection  for each form  of 
expression.  So, this is a point  of expression  and the mean  values  you can see 8.20 for N by P 
ratio were  N by K equal  to 1.57 and for K by P equal  to 5.39.  Now,  the point  of, this point  of 
intersection  of these  three  axis that is N by P, N by K, and K by P represents  the composition  
for which  one is striving  and at which  one should  achieve  the highest  yield  permitted  by the 
limiting  factors  other  than N, P, K.  
So, here you can see there  are two concentric  circles  the first cycle  or inner  circle  shows  the 
15 percent  said the mean  plus 15 percent  zone  and the outer  ring shows  mean  plus 30 percent  zone . So, based  on these  expression,  we have  to define  what  are the limiting  nutrients  in a 
particular  case.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  26:32)  
 
  
So, you if you see the value  for the function  N by P lies in the zone  of N insufficiency.  So, 
what  was the value  of N by P in our case,  so, if we go back,  we will see the N by P value  was 
6. So, it will come  somewhere  around.  So, N by P it is 10.66,  9.43, 7 point,  so, you can see it 
will be somewhere  around  here.  So, that shows  there  is nitrogen  insufficiency,  because  it is 
going  down . Second  is N by K. So, the N by K lies between  what  are the N by K values ? So, 
N by K value  let us go back  and see what  was our N by K values ? So, our N by K values was 
2 and K by P value  was 3.  
So, N by K value  was 2. So, that lies. So, it is 1.81 and 2 point . So, that lies here, N by P lies 
here.  So, that shows  that the N by K lies between  two circles,  and here you can see a 
tendency  for potassium  insufficiency.  So, you can see there  is a tendency  of potassium  
insufficiency  and K by P equal  to 3. So, it should  be somewhere  in these  in this. So, that also 
shows  lies in the zone  of potassium  insufficiency.  So, you can see here.   
So, once  we have  identified  the location based  on our nutrient  concentration  ratio,  once  all 
these  three  common  functions  have  been  read, the remaining  character  is assigned  a 
horizontal  arrow.  So, we can see here,  so, the final reading  then becomes  N will be 
decreasing  phosphorus  followed  by potassium  is decreasing.   
So, here we consider  all these  things,  we can see that, it gives  the order  of requirements  for N, 
P, K in terms  of limiting  importance.  So, we can see potassium  is the most  limiting  condition , 
limiting  nutrient  here,  followed  by nitrogen , followed  by phosphorus.  So, this shows  the 
order  of the limiting  nutrients.  So, this is basically  the crux of a DRIS  system  and based  on 
these  ratios,  we can identify  what  should  be the most  limiting  nutrient  and thereby  we can we can correct  that deficiency  of that particular  nutrient.  So, I hope  that these  this concept  is 
clear  to all of you.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  29:37 ) 
 
So, these  are the references  which  are used for this lecture  and let us wrap  up this lecture  and 
I hope  that you have  gathere d some  useful  knowledge  of course,  so sum part of this lecture  is 
a quick  recap  for understanding  this critical  nutrient  concept  and all other  things.  However,  
we have  also discussed  this Nobel  concepts  of plant  tissue  testing  and also the DRIS  concept . 
So, let us wrap  up this lecture  here and let us discuss  more  about  soil and plant  fertility  
evaluation  in our next lectures . Thank  you.  