Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 5  
Lecture 22  
Soil micronutrients and their role in plant nutrition  (Contd.)  
Welcome friends to this lecture number 22 of NPT EL on online certification course of  soil 
fertility and fertilizers a nd currently we are at week 5 . 
(Refer Slide Time: 0:28)  
 
And in this week we are talking about soil micronutrients and their role in plant nutrition. So, 
in our  previous lecture, we have seen  what are the important micronutrients and why we call 
them micronutrie nts we have described,  we have discussed.  (Refer Slide Time: 0:56) 
 
 Now, in this lecture we are going to discuss this following concept first of all, we are going 
to talk about the micronutrient cycle. And then, we are going to talk about different types of 
sources of micronutrients. Then, we are going to talk about effects of soil properties on 
nutrient bioavailability specifically, micronutrients, apart from that organic chelation with 
micronutrients and apart from that deficiency symptoms of some micronutrients. So, we are 
going to see , what are the deficiency symptoms visually in this in this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:32) 
 
So, these are the key wor ds for this lecture, we are going to talk about mobility of 
micronutrients then chelation , intensive cropping, interv enial  chlorosis and EDTA.  (Refer Slide Time: 1:47) 
 
Now, if you see the sources of micronutrients in the soil, you can see here the, in this table 
these are given. So, if we also can see their major carriers. So, if we talk about manganese, 
manganese, the major mineral sources are Pyrolusite , then Rhodonite , then Rhodochrosite 
and magnetite.  
So, these are the major manganese source and th e name of the salt which contains this 
micronutrient are given also site  manganese sulfate and then Manganese Sulph ate 
monohydrate then this is try hydrate, then manganese EDTA , EDTA is a chelating agent 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and also the mangane se content is also given in the 
parenthesis.  
So, in manganese sulfate tri hydrate we can see 26 to 28  percent of manganese whereas, in 
this monohydrate case we can see 30 to 32  percent of manganese in case of manganese 
EDTA it contains five to 12  percent of manganese.  
Now, in case of iron the major mineral sources are h aematite , goethite , magnetite, pyrite and 
olive in and these are some of the formulas as well as the nutrient content. So, we can see that 
ferrous sulphate,  heptahydrate contain 19  percent iron and then ferric sul phate contain 17  
percent iron and Fe-EDTA contain 12  percent of iron .  
In case of copper, the major sources are Chalcocite, Cuprite , Malachite  and Covellite . 
Whereas, these are the major salts, copper sulphate  pentahydrate we can see 24 percent of 
copper copper sulphate  monohydrate 35  percent of copper and copper EDTA 9 to 13  percent 
of copper.  In case of zinc, the major sources are Sphalerits, Smithsorites  and Hemimorphite and it is 
zinc sulphate  heptahydrate contained 21  percent of zinc whereas, zinc sulphate  monohydrate 
content 33  percent of zinc and zinc EDTA contains 12  percent of zinc .  
In case of nickel, the major sources are Olivine  and Serpentine and in case of boron the major 
sources are Tourmaline , borax , Karnites  and Colama nite. And you can see the sources are 
there also like borax, which is contained 10.5  percent of boron and boric acid which contains 
17.5 percent of boron .  
In case of molybdenum, the  major sources are Molybdenite, W ulfenite, then Powe llite and 
Ferrimolybdi te and the major sources are also given salts are also given like sodium 
molybdate which contain 37 to 39  percent of molybdenum and ammonium molybdate which  
contain  54 percent of molybdenum and also finally chlorine like the major g eneral sources 
are sodiu m chloride and potassium chloride. Whereas in case of p otassium chloride it 
contains 48  percent of chlorine . So, these are the micronutrients sources mineral sources and 
name of the salts which supply this particular nutrient. Now, let me just bring it her e.  
(Refer Slide Time: 5:30) 
 
So, let us move ahead and see , what are the fractions in the soil ? Where we can see the 
presence of micronutrients. So, there are primarily 5 different factions in soil where we can 
see the existence of micronutrients , first of all, in the organically bound form, second is 
exchangeable form, third one is co mplex adsorbed or chelated form.   
Fourth one is occluded and bound in carbonates, sesqui oxides and secondary minerals . 
Sesqui oxides are basically oxides of iron and aluminiu m and finally, the fifth fraction is primary mineral. So, we can see that all these 5 different fractions can , can contain 
micronutrients in soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:17) 
 
Now, if you see the micronutrient cycle in the soil in general, this is a biogeoch emical 
cyclling of micronutrients in the soil -plant system for aerobic  soil, so, we can have an idea. 
So, if there is a crop, when the crop we are harvesting, the micronutrients are depleting as a 
result of crop removal . Also, the nutrients get eroded away  from the soil and also this plant 
the plant basically takes up these micronutrients in free and complex form in soil solution 
through their roots and due to different types of rhizospheric processes also , soil organic 
matter that in the rhizospheric proce ss influences soil organic matter.  
Now, soil organic matter comes from crop residues plant litter  including roots. So, these 
decomposition will create the soil o rganic matter and these  and also different types of 
mineralization and immobilization, can pro duce or can move can help in enriching the soil 
solution with the specific iron.  
So, when the soil organic matter decomposes and mineralization process occurs, the 
micronutrients comes to the soil solution from where the plant uptakes this nutrients, the 
opposite process is mineralization or this opposite process of mineralization is 
immobilization , where these free ions are incorporated in organic forms.  
So, that is called the immobilization process. Apart from that, there is a precipitation of these 
free and complex forms of ions from soil solution to the primary and secondary minerals and 
the opposite process is dissolution where these primary and secondary minerals  supply these 
ions into the soil solution and enriching the soil solution for the further plant uptake.  Sometime these ions from the soil solution gets solved on clay an d iron oxides iron aluminum 
oxides are humus complex and the opposite process is deso rption from where these 
micronutrients, where  again come , micronutrients come back again fr om this salt from to 
these free and complex form in the soil solution. So, this desorption process. So, this is how 
these micronutrients move in the biogeochemical cycle in the soil plant system in case of 
aerobic soil condition.  
(Refer Slide Time: 9:11)  
 
Now, if we go ahead and see the effects of soil pH on micronutrients. So, the soil pH affects 
availability of micronutrients. In general,  the solubility and availability of micronutrients are 
greatest in acid soils and low est in high pH calcareous soils.  So, of course, when there is a 
high pH in the soil, that is more or less calcaneus because that contains high amount of 
calcium. So, in this condition these micronutrients are more or less unavailable, only one 
exception is molybdenum which is available i n that high alkaline soil.  
Now, in some soil high levels of soluble iron, aluminium and manganese may be toxic to the 
plants um all of these aluminium toxicity is very much importa nt.  
So, in case of highly acid ic soil the aluminium can be present in toxi c concentration to 
severely affect the root growth. So, that is why high concentration of aluminium in the acidic 
soil is not at all su itable for plant growth in well -drained soil, which is either edited or 
oxygenated pH controls the availability of iron a nd manganese.  So, these are some of the 
important consideration when we talk about the effects of soil pH on availability of the 
micronutrients.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:33 ) 
 
Now, this picture shows how soil pH affects the availability of different plant n utrient you 
can see here the nitrogen is more or less available, when the soil pH is very slightly acidic to 
very slightly alkaline.  
So, these nitrogen , phosphorus , potassium, sulphur they are specifically nitrogen and 
phosphorus are available in in sligh tly acidic to slightly alkaline condition. Whereas, in case 
of potassium and sulphur they are more available their availability increases from slightly 
acidic to slightly very slightly acidic to alkaline soil in case of calcium, their availability 
increase s their availability is high both for both calcium and magnesium in this , in this zone 
where from very slightly acidic to very slightly alkaline .  
Whereas magnesium availability extends more , in case of iron manganese and boron their 
availability is more i n case of acidic condition, we can see in case of copper and zinc also the 
same is applicable however, in case of molybdenum we can see their availability increases in 
strongly alkaline soil.  
So, for optimum pH availability of all the essential plant nutr ients we can maintai n a soil pH 
at 6.5 or above by lim ing but soil pH should be kept below 7. So, you can see the soil pH 
should be kept below 7. So, that most of the micronutrients or other nutrients can be 
available.  (Refer Slide Time:  12:22 ) 
 
So, what  about the mobility of micronutrients in plants and in soil . So, in plant the mobile 
micronutrients are chlorine and molybdenum because and also because the their symptoms 
deficiency symptoms appear in older tissues just like nitrogen and on the other hand , iron 
zinc, copper, manganese, boron and nickel are relatively immobile and their symptoms 
deficiency symptoms appear in younger tissue as far as the mobility in soil is concerned, so, 
this chlorine and boron are mobile so, they can be easily leached away  from the soil and 
relatively immobile are zinc, iron, copper, manganese and molybdenum.  So, these are the 
relatively immobile nutrients in the within in the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:16 ) 
 
 So, another very important factor that affects the mobility or availability of the 
micronutrients is soil organic matter, because it is an important source of most of the micronutrients and higher content of active soil organic matter implies higher micronutrient 
availability, because it is soil organic matter is know n as the storehouse of nutrients. So, more 
organic matter means more micronutrient availability the plant . Now, simple organic 
compounds is chelates can also improve the availability of the mic ronutrients because the , 
they can improve the availability of t he micronutrients by che lating those metal ca tions. 
Now, what is chelating?  Chelates  is a any class of coordination or complex compound 
consisting of a central metal atom attached to a large molecule and in a cyclic or  ring 
structure. So, here you can see there i s a metal ion and in this metal ion is chelated by these 
this chelating agent that is called EDTA ethylene  diamine  tetra acetic acid to form a ring like 
structure and this whole structure is known as Chelate d.  
So, you can see there is particular me tal ion is surrounded in a ring like structure by these 
EDTA molecules. So, that is why it is called a chelating agent or ligand and ultimately it 
produces this chelate . So, chelated forms of zinc nickel and copper can increase the 
concentration of each me tal in the soil solution to increase their diffusion to root for plant 
uptake. And then sulfur, zinc and boron deficiencies are also more likely to occur in soils, 
low in soil organic matter because the soil organic matter contains these different 
micronut rients. So, when the soils are deficient in soil organic matter, then we can assume 
that sulphur,  zinc and boron deficiency can occur.  
(Refer slide Time: 15:21 )  
 
So, also deficiencies of copper and manganese are most common in peat soil just the opposite  
thing we can see in case of high organic matter soil because these copper and manganese are 
very much , they have high affinity to attach to the organic matter. So, that is why this copper and manganese can form is very stable complex with organic matter a nd as a result of that, 
their availability is reduced.  
So, we can see the deficiency of in copper and manganese in peat soil which is high in which 
are high in organic matter. Then iron copper and manganese are more available under water 
log than aerated condition and in well-drained soil pH controls the availability of iron and 
manganese we have already seen that .  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:13 ) 
 
Now, the organi c chelation with micronutrients. So, natural organic chelates in soil are 
product of microbial acti vity and degradation of soil organic matter plant residues we know 
that whatever natural organic chelates  are present in the soil .  
Now, mainly natural organic chelates have not been yet identified. However, compounds 
such as citrate and oxalic acid formed  during the decomposition have chelating properties. 
Artificial ciliates are widely used in micronutrient fertilizer application to increase the 
micronutrient availability to the p lant. (Refer Slide Time: 16:50 ) 
 
Now, how these chel ates improve these mic ronutrients  availability , chelates prevent loss of 
nutrients through leaching or washing out and chelation increases the mobility of nutrients in 
the soil at these increased mobility enhance the uptake of the nutrients to the plants.  
So, here you can see there i s a chelating agent and when it goes to the soils, it gets complex it 
makes th e complex of  this metal ions and then this metal ion complex can go to the root 
surface and then release this metal s to be uptaken by the plant. So, the so, basically this  
increased mobility of the nutrient can be facilitated by the presence of this chelating agent.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:42 ) 
 Now, what are the different terms which are used to describe the nutrient levels in plants, first 
of all is deficient second is cri tical range third one is sufficient or optimal and fourth one is 
excessive or toxic.  
Now, what is deficient , deficient we call a nutrient condition deficient when the concentration 
of an essential element is low enough to severely limit the yield . When th e diff when the 
concentration of a particular element produce the severe diff serious symptoms and retarding 
the growth that is called deficient  condition, what is critical range? it is a nutrient 
conce ntration in plan below which a yield response occurs w hen the essential nutrient is 
added.  
So, generally the critical concentration is critical range is a concentration in the plant below 
which if we add fertilizer of a particular nutrient that will give that will show the yield  
response to the crop .  
The th ird one is sufficient or optimal nutrie nt concentration. So, doing the, it is a range. So, 
when the nutrient concentration range, this nutrient content is concentration range, where the 
eel does not increase when more of these essential element is added.  
So, basically it is led to, s o, if we go on applying these nutrient and we see the growth of the 
plant, when the growth of the plant reaches a plateau that is called a sufficient or optimal 
nutrient concentration.  
So, we cannot see any substantial yield g rowth or yield increase however plant tissue 
concentration can increase. The last one is called the excessive a toxic concentration, when 
the concentration of an essential or non essential element is high enough to reduce plant 
growth and yield that is cal led toxic or excessive concentration. So , these are some of the 
important concepts concepts, which we frequently use for soil fertility and fertilizer 
application.  (Refer Slide Time:  19:54 ) 
 
Now, if we see these are , these the typical those response curve for this is an essential 
element curve and  this is the, this is for non essential elements. So, we can see that when the 
elemental concentration of of a specific essential element we go on increasing. So, at initial 
stage we can s ee this high increase o f plant , how high increase of plant yield . So, the here in 
this zone you can see there is a severe deficiency.  
So, the slope of increase of implant deal with increasing elemental concentration is very high. 
And then as we go on increasing the concentratio n, you can see the slope is decreasing and 
ultimately, it reaches a point from where it goes in a plateau.  
So, here this point is known as the lower critical concentration. So, below this lower critical 
concentra tion, there is a deficiency zone,  in the de ficiency zone we can see severe deficiency 
or hidden or mild deficiency and up to that critical level , this is an upper critical level 
concentration up to which we can see there is no change in plant yield with the increasing 
elemental concentration.  
So, this is the optimal range of plant nutrition , plant nutrient content however, when we go on 
increasing the essential element concentration, a time will come after these up per critical 
concentration, you wi ll see the, there will be a reduction in plant grow th, which is also can be 
divided into 2 zone that is 1 is mild zone and other is severe zone in the severe zone, the rate 
of decline is v ery high as compared to the mild  zone.  
So, this is how these a group dose response curve for essential elements. Howev er, in case of 
a non essential element, when you increase the elemental concentration in the in the in the soil, you will see that there is no effect however, there will be a critical critical concentration 
beyond which you will see there will be a decreas e in plant  yield .  
So, that can be also divided into mild as well as severe decline in plant yield. So, this is how 
we can see the dose response curves  for essential elements and non -essential elements.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:34 ) 
 
 
Now, this slide shows  the adequate levels of micronutrients in plants and their diverse 
response under deficiency and toxicity. So, you can see the micronutrient toxicity levels and 
micronutrient deficiency levels are given here. So, if w e can see the the micronutrient  in plant  
adequate level in case of boron that is 10 to 80 ppm,  in case of manganese this is 90 0, 90 to 
200 ppm, in case of zinc  that is 100 to 1 20 ppm of course, the stages are given there like 
sugar metabolisms, stage flowering stage fruit and seed development st age.  Then, manganese in cas e of manganese the 90 to 200 ppm  there is requisite for 
photosynthesis and then zinc is 100 to 120 in ppm, which is required for early growth and 
development stage .  
Copper 10 to 25 ppm, which is required for enzyme activation, activation and infl uencing the 
nitrogen metabolism.  Iron is 22,000 ppm for chlorophyll synthesis. So, these are the adequate 
level within the plant however, when the boron is less than 10 ppm , manganese is less than 
90 ppm  and then zinc is less than 10  ppm, copper is less than 10 ppm  and iron is less than 20 
ppm, then we can see the deficiency symptoms like leaves dry out when vein remains green 
so, it is in case of iron , in case of copper we can see leaves turn dark brown and fall off.  
In case of zinc we can se e growth rate of plant (s herb) slows ends and stops entirely in case a 
manga nese motal  leaves and growth virtually stops and  in case of boron  we can see (steb)  
stem become to rn with b rown tip s and, and spindle leave s. In case of micronutrient toxicit y, 
just opposite we can  see boron  is greater than 80 ppm,  manganese 200 ppm greater than 200 
ppm, zinc is greater than 120 ppm,  copper more than 25 ppm, iron more than 2000 ppm.  
So, in case of boron toxicity, we can see tips and ages of leave s exhibit nec rotic spot in case 
of manganese toxicity, we can see reduction in growth , brown spo t on leaves, and then and 
also in case of zinc we can see severe stunting of the crop.  
And then retaining poor germination and then wilting of older leaves then chlorosis o f the 
entire leaf. And then in case of copper toxicity, we can see an iron deficiency may be induced 
with very low growth and roots may be stunted, in case of , in case of copper , in case of iron 
we can see bruising and stripping of leaves and leaf discolor ation. So, these are the optimal 
range and then micronutrient deficiency and then micronutrient toxicity for the plants .  
So, how to identify the deficiency in the soil so, basically extraction with the DTPA , DTPAs  
and other ciliates. So, we generally extr act the  micronutrients from the soil through  DTPA 
because DTP A simulates , micronutrient removal by plant fruit and replenishment from level 
soil phases in the soil.  
So, we know that the plant roots absorb these nutrients from these  free metals from the so il 
soluti on, which shows the depletion  in the free metals an d activity due to removal by the 
plant and these and these, so, the free metal ions in the solution can also be chelated and 
taken away by extraction by with the DTPA which also can resemble the d epletion in free 
metal ion activity due to the formation of metal DTPA complex. So, that resembles the 
depletion of free metal ion due to removal of the plan t. So, that is why we generally use these DTP A extraction to , do and then after DTPA  extraction, we  measured them using standard 
methodology for identifying their concentration in the extracted solution.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:51 )  
 
So, if we can see the average removal of micronutrients by different cropping system. So, in 
case of rice rice cropping sy stem, we can see that this is the removal of zinc , iron, 
manganese, copper boron molybdenum, in case of rice wheat system of course, we can see 
even creased nutrient removal micronutrient removal here 384 , 3108 and then 2980 , 168, 
252.  
And only in case of  molybdenum they are same . In case of Maize -wheat system. Of course, 
the nutrient removal is more because maize is a heavy feeder crop and except for manganese 
and and we can see that in case of zinc and iron and also in higher  copper removal from the 
soil in gram per hectare.  (Refer Slide Time: 27:45 ) 
 
 
So, what are the causes of micronutrient deficiency there are different types of causes of 
micronutrient deficiency, one is parent material, then highlighting and hybrid varieties, 
imbalanced nutrient ap plications soil pH, soil condition, low organic matter , overlining , 
micronutrient free high analysis fertilizers high end is fertilizer means, those fertilizer which 
are containing high amount of more than 30  percent of nutrients, available nutrients and l and 
leveling and scrapping and interaction between nutrients.  
So, all these are different causes of micronutr ient deficiency,  micronutrients of little concern 
you can see calcium, magnesium, manganese and copper are of little concern because of this 
reaso n for example, in case of calcium the deficiency can be seen in very acidic soil which is 
rare deficiency. Magnesium deficiency can be seen in very acidic and sandy soil. Manganese 
deficiency can be seen in case of high pH, high soil organic matter soil, a nd in case of copper deficiency, it can be seen in high organic matter highly weathered soil. So, these are 
micronutrients of little concern.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:47 ) 
 
And these are the deficiency symptoms of the micronutrients like in case of boron ter minal 
growth shows and also shows rosetting  and then chlorine chlorosis in younger leaves , copper 
leaf tips  become white , Iron interveinal  chlorosis,  manganese interveinal  chlorosis  in younger 
leaves. In case of molyb denum deficiency, we can see Leaf  becom es pale and in case of zinc 
development of chlorotic midribs.  So, these are the deficiency symptoms of these 
micronutrients.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:18 ) 
 
So, if we talk about the soil zinc, the zinc is very much essential for enzyme system and zinc 
in solut ion can quite immobile in soil and can become deficient  in flooded soil, it may be toxic in in problems soil first suscepti ble plants. So, you can see 2 conditions where zinc a 1 
untreated soil and that is zinc untreated soil and another  is zinc treated so il.  
So, you can see clearly the difference between these app lied and non apply zinc and non -zinc 
applied plant response.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:54 ) 
 
So, if you see these Z inc deficiencies there are several types of sensitive crops like corn,  
sorghum and there are several soils situation which can enhance the zinc deficiency like low 
organic matter, high pH, eroded soil , coarse texture, restricted routing high phosphorus 
application because there is an antagonism between phosphorus and zinc. So, high 
phosp horus a pplication in conjugation with b orderline or losing availability then high soil 
phosphorus alone remember that high soil phosphorus alone does not c reate the deficiency, 
but with b orderline or losing availability is another cause  and then in case of  climatic 
condition, cold and wet soil is another cause of zinc deficiency.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:40 ) 
 
So, if you see the phosphorus and zinc relationship excessive concentration of phosphorus in 
the plant root results in the binding of zinc within the root cell. So, large amount of started 
application of phosphorus can enhance zinc deficiency , if soil zinc is low and nosing fertilizer 
is applied. I have mentioned in the p revious slide that more soil  phosphor us fertilizer 
application with b orderline zinc  condition can aggravate the zinc deficiency.  
So, here you can see 0 , 0 b oth of them are same. And here when we are phosphorus 
pentoxide or petoferrous  is 0, we can see higher zinc concentration. So, you can actually you 
can see the yield is increasing an d also you can see here when 80 to 0,  80k pound per acre . P 
2 O 5  is given and 0, we can see here and also when we apply this 10 ppm,  10 pound of zinc 
per acre, we can see these concentrations.  
So, we can see here one thing that there is a antagonistic re lationship between phosphorus 
and zinc. So, when the phosphorus is low zinc is high however, when phosphorus 
concentration in the tissue increases, zinc concentration goes down . (Refer Slide Time: 32:12 ) 
 
 Iron, Iro n in plant catalyzes the production of chlorophyll and it is involved with several 
enzyme systems and the deficiency symptoms of iron can be seen in terms of yellowing to 
whitening of leaves and then symptoms first appear in the younger leaves and wide range of 
susceptibility of different crops  can be seen as far as the iron deficiency is concerned.  
So, sorghum field beans and soybeans are more sensitive than corn and alfa  alfa and varieties 
differ within the crop also in terms of iron deficiency symptoms.  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:51 ) 
 
So, guys,  let us wrap up this lecture and these are the references for this lecture. I hope you 
have got some idea about nutrient suffeciency  and deficiency and we are going to continue these nutrient deficiency symptom s in our coming lecture. And we wi ll discuss w hat are the 
deficiency symptoms of different types of micronutrients in different crops. Thank you .  