Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology  Kharagpur  
Lecture: 21  
Soil m icronutrients and their role in plant nutrition  
Welcome friends to this twenty first  lecture of NPTEL  online certification course of soil 
fertility and fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:24)  
 
And in this new week, week 5, we are going to discuss soil micronutrients and their role in 
plant nutrition. So, in our previous weeks, we have a lready discussed all 6 macronutrients. In 
week 2  we have discussed nitrogen. In week 3  we have discussed phosphorus  and potassium. 
And in week 4 , we have discussed all the 3  secondary nutrients calcium, magnesium and 
sulfur. Now, in this wee k 5, we are going t o discuss the micronutrients which are also very, 
very important for plant growth and their nutrition.   (Refer Slide Time: 1:11 ) 
 
So, these are the concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture. First of all, soil health 
indicators we are going to  discuss briefly then essential plant nutrients we are going to 
discuss micronutrients, micronutrient deficiency and also physiological functions of 
micronutrients we are going to discuss .  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:29)  
  
And these are some of the keywords li ke micronutrients then zinc, iron, manganese, copper. 
So, these are some of the keywords for  this first lecture of week 5  or lecture number 21. So, 
we already know that there are different types of soil health indicators  and when you define a 
soil health t hat has a connection with both macronutrients and micronutrients, different types 
of physical conditions of the soil, and also the biological health of the soil and other abiotic 
stresses. So, these all play an important role for m aintaining the soil healt h. So, that is why 
along with the macronutrients micronutrients are also very much important for plant growth 
and nutrition.  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:24)  
 
So, the word micronutrients represent some essential nutrients that are required in very small 
quantiti es for the growth of plants and microorganisms.  The definition of micro is given because of the relative quantity need ed by the plant, however, irrespective of their quantity  
they are all important for maintaining or completing the lifecycle of the plant.  
Now, there are 17 essential elements for plant growth we already know , out of these 8  
elements are considered as micronutrients . What are those? They are iron, manganese, 
copper, zinc, boron, molybdenum, nickel and chlorine , we know that.  
Also, out of th ese micronutrients, iron, manganese , copper , zinc behave like cata ions, because 
Iron is available to the pl ant as Fe2 plus , manganese Mn 2 plus , copper C u2 plus , zinc Zn2  
plus. However, boron, molybdenum a nd chlorine behave like as anions . So, we wi ll see t hat 
available forms in our coming slides.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:45)  
 
So, this is a broad classification between essential plant nutrients. We know apart from the C, 
H and O t hese are 3 structural elements. These are 6  macronutrients and micronutrients N , P, 
K, C a, Mg, S, and micro macronutrients. However, in case of micronutrients we can see 
boron, chlorine, copper, iron, manganese, molybdenum, zinc and nickel. These 8 comes 
under the micronutrient category of essential plant nutrient.  (Refer Slide Time: 4 :15) 
 
Now, the chemistry of these micronutrients are different from , so, the chemical chemistry of 
this micronutrient cations , like Fe 2 plus M n2 plus Cu 2 plus Zn2 plus are different from the 
micronutrient anions. So , among these 8 micronutrients, the cont ent of iron in soil, as well as 
in plants is the highest and sometime higher than even phosphorus and sulfur content.  
So, iron is the most abundant micronutrient and the and also sometimes they a re more richer 
than even for phosporous and sulphur , micronu trients are also called trace  elements or oligo 
elements or spurn  elements. So, these are some synonyms of micronutrients.  
(Refer Slide Time: 5:11)   
 Now, what is micro? S o, this slide  will clarify why we will call them as micronutrients. So, if 
we compa re the the the uptake of nitrogen versus molybdenum for producing 6 tonnes of rice. 
So, to produce the 6 tons of rice we require 100 kg of nitrogen however, for producing the 
same 6 tonnes of rice we require only 30 grams of molybdenum or 0.03 kg of molybd enum. 
So, you can see that there is a clear difference between the amount of needed by the plant as 
far as the nitrogen and molybdenum are concerned.  
So, we can see clearly why we call molybdenum as a micronutrient because of the relative 
lace quantity of  the requirement for plant growth.  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:15)  
 
However, as I already mentioned, it does not matter whether a micronutrient is required in 
less quantity or not, they are always important, and that can be substantiated by Liebig ’s law 
of mini mum, we have already discussed these Liebig’s law of  minimum in our first week of 
lectures.  
So, we know that the yield potential of a crop is like a barrel with staves of unequal length, 
the capacity of the barrel is limited by the length of the shortest stave and can only be 
increased by lengthening that stave . So, it does not matter whether that the micro editing is 
require  in less quantity or not the micronutrient deficiency can affect the the growth of the 
plant more than other available nutrients when  it is deficient, because of Liebig ’s law of 
minimum.   (Refer Slide Time: 7:18)  
 
Now, let us see some critical informati on on  micronutrients in relation to the plant. So, these 
are some of the micronutrients and they are  the the authors who have discover ed their 
essential duties and the year of discovery and plant usable form and and and we have seen we 
can see that average concentration plant tissue. So, manganese was discovered by Mchargue  
in 192 2 and the plant usable form is M n2 plus, whereas, average concentration in plant 
tissues 20 milligram per kg or 20 ppm.  
Zinc was discovered by essentially 80 of zinc was discovered by Somner and Li pman in 
1926 . And plant usable form is Zn2  plus and average concentratio n is 20 ppm. In case of 
copper it was discov ered in 1931 b y Somner and Li pman and M ckinney  and plant usable 
form is Cu 2 plus average concentration is 6 ppm. Iro n was discovered by Greece in 1843 
plant usable form is actually the availability of the , or the essentiality of Iron  was discovered 
by Gree ce in 1843.  
And the plant usable form is Fe 2 plus an average concentration in plant  tissue is  100 PPM . 
Arnon and Stout  in 1939 discovered the essentiality of molybdenum and pla nt usable form is 
molybdate or MoO 4 2 minus and  average concentr ation in the p lant is 0.1 ppm, Brown 
Welch and Cary  in 1987 discovered the essentiality of nickel and the plant usable form is in a 
2 plus an average concentration plant tissues 0.1 PPM .  
Boron, the average the essentiality  of boron was discovered by War ington in 1923. And it is 
available in this form H 3 BO 3, H 2 BO 3 minus, HBO 3,  2 minus and BO 3 minus, and average tissue concentration is 20 ppm. And in case of the they essentiality  of chlorine was 
discovered by Broyer,  Carlton , Johnson and S tout. In 1954 t he plant u sable form is chloride 
and average concentration is in plant tissue is 100 ppm.  
So, we can see that average concentration of both iron and chlorine are almost similar and 
this is 100 ppm in that plant tissue.  
(Refer Slide Time: 9:58)  
 
 
Now, why micronu trient is a matter of concern ? Although it is declared in very less quantity, 
so, why we even care about whether they are available in the soil or not. Now, within the last 
few years the nutrient reserve in soil, we have seen that this is the nutrient rese rve in the soil is gradually exhausted and it was no longer possible to sustain higher yields even by applying 
botqh nitrogen and phosphorus.  
So, supply nitrogen and phosphorus cannot cope up with the decrease in yield  as a result of 
exertion of nutrient reserves. So, micronutrient deficiency are also observed in cereal  oil seed 
pulse and vegetable crops, which became critical in obtaining and sustaining higher  crop 
production over the years.   
Field -scales zinc deficiency was first noticed in rice in 1966.  And then zinc deficiency was 
observed in highly wheat varieties to and gradually deficiencies of iron in rice and manganese 
in wheat were also observed. So, for the last couple of decades, we have seen a gradual 
increase in micronutrient deficiency in the  soil and there are several reasons behind that.  
So, before going to  those reason, let us see that the f oodgrain plus oil seed production versus 
a the consumption of micronutrient fertilizer in the country over the years. So, starting from 
2004 to 5, the data is given up to 2020 and we can  see that, with the fertilizer, fertilizer 
micro nutrient  consumption is continuously increase and also the total food grain per oilseed 
production is also continuously increased.  
So, this red line is showing the increase  continuous increase in total food grain products plus 
oilseed production, whereas fertilizer consumption, so, 1 thing is clear, with the increase of 
total production of grain and oil seeds, we have seen a continuous increase in fertilizer 
consumption, mic ronutrient fertilizer consumption also in this right figure, it can be seen that 
it has an impact of green revolution on the emergence of micronutrient deficiencies in crops 
of In dia. So, you can see from 1950s, 60s, 70s, 65, 70, 75 in 1980s, up to 2050. S o, it is 
projected. So, we can see how gradually different micronutrients are becoming unavailable.  
So, 1965 w e have seen the deficiency of iron and zinc in 1970 the deficiency of iron , zinc and 
potassium apart  from this iron and zinc, we have seen the de ficiency of nitrogen phosphorus 
potassium, then, in 1975 Apart from these iron and zinc, the nitrogen phos phorus potassium 
sulfur, where so, as the time progresses  the number of elements s howing the deficienc 
continuously increases due to different types o f reasons.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:43)  
 
So, if we consider the Indian soil the 3 most important micronutrients are zinc, boron 
molybdenum, because in many parts of India,  the deficiencies of these 3  micronutrients are 
very much good, we , you can observe th e deficiency of these 3 nutrients in different parts of 
India. So, that is why these are important micronutrients as far as the Indian soils are 
concerned.  
(Refer Slide time: 14:10)  
 
Now, let us see what are the functions of micronutrients. So, if we con sider the boron , boron 
is useful for sugars translocation in plant and also chlorine which is important for stomatal 
opening and copper is important for acc elerating the photosynthesis Iro n is important for chlorophyll formation. Manganese is important for  as an auto catalyst molybdenum is a 
macro nutrient  which helps in nitrogen fixation and assimilation and zinc helps in promoting 
the growth hormone.  
So, these are the functions, major functions of these micronutrients. So, you can see that for 
the growth and metabolism of the plant, these elements are very e ssential.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:01)  
 
Now, let us see the functions major functions of different elements one by one . So, we can 
see in case of zinc , zinc is an essential component of three enzymes, one is carbonic 
anhydrase, another is alcoholic dehydrogenase and superoxide dismutase for energy 
production, protein synthesis and growth regulation, it is also an important in the synthesis of 
indole acetic acid and also this is essential for water uptake . Zinc plays an important role in 
stabilization of the protein.  
So, you can understand that how zinc is very much important it is with pretty much essential 
for different enzymes, enzymatic activities, which regulates the energy production and 
protein synt hesis and growth regulation.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:50)  
 
Iron in case of Iro n, it is an important constituent of two main groups of protein. So, one is 
Heme -protein another is  iron sulfur protein.  
So, iron is involved in the production of chlorophyll it  is in, it also acts as oxygen carrier it 
helps in the nucleic acid metabolism, it helps in chlorophyll synthesis protein synthesis, it the 
iron acts as in, as catalyst inactivated nitrous indeed that is also it i s a structural component of 
porphyrin  molec ules and it required for nitrogen fixation. So, these are some of the major 
functions of iron.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:35)  
  
 
Now, let us talk about the major function of boron. So, we can see that the primary function 
of boron is related to cell wall  formation, it is important for pollination and pollen 
germination, it helps in potassium translocation as well as stomatal  opening , helps in calcium 
metabolism, it acts as a regulator of potassium calcium ratio and it is also essential for 
translocation of s ugar.  
So, these are the major functions of boron. So, if we can classify the four major functions of 
boron are drought tolerance, sugar translocation, pollen tube elongation  and cell wall 
formation , deficiency of boron can impact the pollen tube and ultim ately create the pollen 
tube dysfunction and also ultimately results in  poor seed set.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:27)  
 
And in case of copper, the major functions are carbohydrate and nitrogen metabolism, it is it 
is a copper is a carrier in oxidation reductio n reaction, it it helps in utilization of iron in 
chlorophyll synthesis, and it also enhances the fertility of the male flowers and it also 
enhances the disease resistance in the plants.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:57)  
 
In case of manganese , manganese is necess ary in photosynthesis nitrogen metabolism and to 
form other compounds required for plant metabolism, it i s important constituents of 
suproxide dismutase or Mn -SOD . It takes part in electron transport photosystem 2 and electron transport in photosystem 2 and it also acts as enzyme activation and these enzyme 
produce amino acids.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:23)  
 
So, in case of molybdenum , molybdenum is an im portant constituent of nitrogena se enzyme, 
which helps in Nitrogen  fixation in legume crops and it is an  essential component of nitrateic  
acid and reductase  enzyme .  
Also helps in protein synthesis and sulfur metabolism and also has a significant effect on 
pollen formation. And it has also an essential role in iron absorption and translocation in 
plants.  
(Refe r Slide Time: 18:54 ) 
 In case of chlorine it is essential for stomatal opinion and chlorine is related to electrical 
charge balance in physiological functions in plants and it indirectly affects plant growth by 
stomatal regulation of water loss.  
(Refer Sl ide Time: 19:12)  
 
So, guys, by this, let us wrap up this lecture in this lecture we have seen the basics of 
micronutrients and why they are important, they are ruled in the plant metabolism we have 
discussed and also we have discussed they are available f orms and when t hey were they are 
essentialit y criteria was discovered we have discussed.  
So, these important basic overview of these micronutrients will be required  for identifying, 
they are for identifying or for exp laining their role in the growth of th e plants and their 
metabolism so let us wrap up this lecture here and we will start from here in the next lecture 
and we will discuss more about these micronutrients , thank you .  
  