Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture:  27 
Soil Testing  and Soil Fertility  Evaluation  Methods  (Continued)  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:21)  
 
Welcome  friends  to this second  lecture  of week  6 of NPTEL  online  certification  course  of 
Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers . In this week,  we are discussing  about  soil testing  and soil 
fertility  evaluation  methods . In our first lecture,  that is lecture  number  26, we have  discussed  
about  plant  tissue  testing,  how to use the plant  as a diagnostic  plant  nutrition  content  as a 
diagnostic  tool. 
And also we have  discussed  about  DRIS  concept  and how we can use the ratios  of different  
nutrients  to identify  the most  limiting nutrient . So, in this lecture,  lecture  number  27, we are 
going  to discuss  about  the soil testing  and also the different  types  of soil sampling  methods,  
we are going  to discuss  in details .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:20)  
 
 
So, these  are the concepts  which  we are going  to discuss  in this lecture  like crop logging,  then 
soil chemical  analysis , then what  are the objectives  of soil testing  and then different  types  of 
soil sampling . So, let us first start with the crop logging  however,  I also should  mention  that 
these  are the some  of the keywords  for this lecture  like crop logging,  grid sampling,  random  
sampling,  zone  sampling,  stratified  sampling  and hybrid  sampling .  
So, we are going  to discuss  what  are the ways  through  which  we can collect  the soil sample  
so, that we can ensure  that there  is perfect  representation  of the variability  of the land but at 
the consideration  of your available  resources .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  2:33)  
 
So, let us start, what  is crop logging?  Now,  crop logging  is basically  a graphical  
representation  of the progress  of the crop containing  a series  of chemical  and physical  
measurement . So, basically  in this crop logging,  we do a series  of chemical  and physical  
measurement  and we graphically  represent  the progress  of the crop in terms  of those 
parameters . So, these  measurements  indicate  the general  condition  of the plant  and suggest  
changes  in the management  that are necessary  to produce  the maximum  yield .  
So, if we can see the temporal  changes  of different  nutrient  concentration  and also crop 
physiological  parameters  also, then we can identify  okay  we need  to add these  nutrients  at 
this point  of time.  
So, a critical  nutrient  concentration  approach  is used in the crop log system,  we already  know  
what  is CNC  and nutrient concentration  in leaf sheaths for example,  in case of sugarcane,  the 
nutrient  concentration  in leaf sheaths  number  3, 4, 5 and 6 are utilized  to diagonals  to 
calcium,  magnesium,  sulphur  and micronutrient  deficiencies.  Based  on this critical  nutrient  
concentration  approach  and during  the growing  season,  plant  tissue  is sampled  every  35 days 
and analyzed  for nitro gen, sugar , moisture  and weight  of the young  tissue,  young  sheath  
tissue . So, this is how this crop logging  is executed .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  4:23)  
 
So, if you see this graph  we can clearly  see that we can have  the maximum  minimum  
temperature  and changes  in the growth  of the crop,  the nitrogen  concentration , moisture  
content  and also total sugar , potassium  oxide  and also phosphorus  and phosphorus  index . So, 
these  are different  types  of measurements,  physical  and chemical  measurements  we take and 
then graphically  represent  to identify  those  stages  where  we require  any intervention . So, this 
is all about  Crop  logging . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  5:00)  
 
Another  method  you must  remem ber we have  discussed  briefly  mentioned  that is there  is a 
method  of involving  growing  of higher  plant s and microorganisms . So, here basically  we grow  different  types  of seedling s or different  microorganisms  to identify  the deficiency  or 
sufficiency  of a particular  nutrient .  
Some examples  you can see Neubauer  seedling  method , then Mitscherlich  pot culture  method  
these  are plant  based  methods  whereas,  microorganisms  based  methods  you can see 
Azotobacter  plaque  method  then Mehlich’s  Cunningham ella-plaque  method for phosphorus , 
then Mehlich’s  technique  for available  K2O  by Aspergillus  niger methods . So, these  are 
some  of the microorganisms  based  method  for identifying  the soil and crop nutrient  status.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  6:07)  
 
Now,  let us go ahead  and see the soil chemical  analysis . So, the soil chemical  analysis  is 
basically  it is a chemical  method  of estimation  of the nutrient  supply ing capacity  of a soil, 
this is very important  and this is the most  widely  accepted  method  for evaluation  of soil 
fertility.   
Remember  that in this soil chemical  analysis  method  it is consist  of different  steps.  The first 
step is soil sampling  which  is the most  important  step, then soil processing , then chemical  
extraction  measurement  and then interpretation  and fertilizer  recom mendation . So, these  all 
these  steps  are important  for soil chemical  analysis  and unless  you interpret  the results  that 
will not be considered  as a full soil testing  or proper  soil testing  because  the whole  soil 
testing  always  include  the nutrient  concentr ation  interpretation  and also the fertilizer  
recommendation .  
So, in this soil chemical  analysis,  we generally  measure  a portion  of the nutrient  from  a pool 
that plant s use. Remember  that this method  does not measure  the total amount  of nutrient  in the soil. For example,  in case of nitrogen  that nitrogen  can be present  in both organic  forms  
and inorganic  forms  and maximum  amount  of nitrogen  almost  95 to 98 percent  is available  in 
the soil in the organic  forms  in the protein  form,  but plant  cannot  take that nutrient .  
So, the available  forms  of these  nutrients  are only nitrate  and ammonium . So, when  you go 
for the soil chemical  analysis,  you only measured  the nitrate  and ammonium  to interpret  or to 
identify  the nitrogen  uptake  or nitrogen  supplying  capacity  of the soil.  
So, that means,  this soil chemical  analysis  measures  a pool of the total nutrient  that plant s use 
or in other  words,  we generally  measure  the available  nutrients  that is why the soil chemical  
analysis  is known  as an index  of nutrient  availabil ity. Remember  one another  important  point  
is these  soil chemical  analyses  needs  to be calibrated  in field or greenhouse  and then used in 
nutrient  or fertilizer  recommendation  and it can determine  soil nutrient  status  before  a crop,  it 
can be either  field crop or vegetable  crop ornamental  crop is plant ed and this is remember , 
please  remember  these  soil chemical  analyses  is utmost  important  for before  you grow a crop. 
So, these  are some  of the important  points.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  9:18)  
 
Now,  what  are the objectives  of soil chemical  analysis  or soil testing?  First of all, the most  
important  objective  is to teach  the fertility  status  of a given  field. So, farmers  want  to test 
their soil and I want  to and they want  to identify  whether  the nutrient  content  of their soil is 
high, medium  or low. So, this is the first important  objective  of soil testing.   
Secondly,  to predict  the probability  of obtaining  a profitable  response  to lime and fertilizer . 
So, this is the second  objective  of soil testing . Third objective  is to provide  a basis  for recommendations  on the amount  of lime and fertilizer  application . Lime is a, it is an 
amendment  which  we apply  to correct  soil acidity  and also fertilizer  we generally  apply to 
correct  the nutrient  deficiency .  
So, we need  a basis  for this recommendation  of lime and fertilizer  application . So, soil testing  
or soil chemical  analysis  gives  us that particular  basis. Fourth  one is to evaluate  the fertility  
status  of soil in a country , soil area or statewide  basis . So, we can apply  these  soil chemical  
analyses  to identify  the fertility  of the status  of the soil fertility  status  for a given  area or 
broader  area. So, these  are some  of the objectives  of soil testing.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:07)  
 
Now,  if you see the three  major  purpose  of soil analysis  first of all to determine  the level  of 
availability  of the nutrients , secondly  to predict  the fertility  of the soil and finally,  to evaluate  
the status  of each nutrient  element . So, these  are the three  major  purposes  of soil analysis.   (Refer  Slide Time:  11:31)  
 
Now,  what  are the benefits  of soil testing ? Soil testing  generally  encourages  plant  growth  by 
providing  the best fertilizer  recommendation . So, because  of soil testing  one can identify  
whether  that soil is deficient  or sufficient  in a particular  nutrient . So, if that soil is deficient  
then if you apply  the recommended  fertilizer  dose that can encourages  plant  growth , it 
diagnoses  whether  there  is too little or too much  nutrient . Soil testing  promotes  
environmental  quality  because  if we applied  too much  nutrient  without  considering  the proper  
judicious  dose of nutrient  then that can create  environmental  hazard.   
For example,  if we apply  the nitrate  fertilizer  that can create , nitrate  can, nitrate  is really  very 
mobile  in the soil and most  of the nitrate  can leach  or move  away  from  the soil by a surface  
runoff  and then they can go to the water  body  and create  the health  hazards . So, soil testing  
gives  the basis  for particular  nutrient  application  and in that way you can it can ensure  that 
environmental  quality . It also saves  money  that might  otherwise  be spent  or unneeded  
fertilizer . So, to prevent  the unnecessary  fertilizer  application,  these  soil testing  is also very 
much  required .  
So, again,  first of all, it gives  us the basis  for fertiliz er recommendation , it diagnosis  whether  
we have  soil has too little or too much  of a nutrient  and it ensures  the environmental  quality  
and also it increases  the profit  by saving  the money  that can be spent  by an unnecessary  
fertilizer  application .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:52)  
 
So, the next question  comes  to our mind  when and how to take a soil sample?  Remember  that 
soil sampling  should  be done  before  plant ing anything  in the field or after the harvesting  the 
previous  crop and also we should  sample  the soil before  application  of any organic  or 
chemical  fertilizer  because  based  on soil testing  we should  apply  the organic  or chemical  
fertilizer .  
So, soil testing  should  be done  after harvesting  a crop and before  plant ing the next crop and 
also before  applicatio n of organic  and chemical  fertilizer s. Also,  if you apply  if you have  
applied  any organic  or chemical  fertilizer s and you should  wait three  months  and then you 
can do the soil sampling.   
Remember  that soil sampling  is the most  important  step of soil testin g and much  of the 
problem,  I mean  most  problem  in soil testing  comes  from  faulty  soil sampling . So, there  are 
specific  guidelines  for soil sampling . So, you should  not collect  the soil sample  from  a 
grazing  area or area under  the tree or where  the garbage  will or any fertilizer  bags or 
farmyard  manure  or any other  manure  are piled  up.  
So, you should  not collect  the soil samples  from  those  areas , you should  not collect  the soil 
samples  from  the borders  of the field, you should  not collect  the soil samples  from a low 
lying  areas  where  water  is stagnant  and you should  not collect  the soil samples  from  the area 
where  already  fertilizer  has been  applied .  So, these  are the some  of the important  consideration  you should  remember  when  you go for 
soil sampling.  In Indian  condition,  we generally  recommend  at least you do soil testing  once  
in three  years . So, these  are these  should  be the frequency  and timing  of soil sampling.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:22)  
 
Now,  let us discuss  how to sample  the soil. One thing  you shoul d remember  that soil is highly  
heterogeneous . So, soil from  one area varies  widely  from  the soil of other  area. So, when  you 
take the soil sample,  you must  remember  that your sample  must  be representative  of the 
variability  of that area. So, there  are a couple of methods  of soil sampling  first method  is 
regular  sampling .  
So, in this method,  sub samples  are taken  at regular  spaced  intervals  in all directions . So, as 
you can see in this picture  or in this picture,  you can see that the whole  area divided  into 
some  cells and sub samples  are taken  at regular  spaced  intervals  in all the direction . However,  
this should  be only be used in conjunction  with a good  soil map of the area,  so, that the soil 
conditions  at each point  are known . So, we should  do the regular  sampling  but in conjunction  
with a good  soil map of the area. So, this is the regular  sampling , the next is random  
sampling .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  17:46)  
 
So, in this random  sampling  basically  we take samples  randomly  throughout  the field.  And 
for long term trends,  if we want  to go back  to this particular  point  and want  to see what  is the 
change  or if we want  to map then we can go for sampling  points  with GPS. So, all these  GPS 
location  can be gathered  using  a GPS receiver  and we can use those  GPS points  or their 
locational  latitude  and longitude  for producing  the future  maps  of soil fertility . So, this is 
called  a random  sampling .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:28)  
 
So, simple  random  sampling  in this method . So, this simple  random  sampling  is basically  the 
random  sampling . So, in this method  specific  sampling  units  such as location , time et cetera  are designated  using  random  numbers  and few of them  are randomly  selected  from the least 
or by sampling  an area by using  pairs  of random  coordinates .  
So, again,  this is a random  sampling  method  and random  numbers  and the samples  are 
collected  by random  using  random  fashion  and few of them  are randomly  selected  from  the 
list by sampling  an area by using  pairs  of random  coordinates.  Simple  random  sampling  is 
quite  useful  when the area to be sample  for soil is homogeneous .  
So, when  the soil is very homogeneous,  you can gather  this, you can gather  the soil sample  
randomly.  However,  that can create  bias if the soil area or the area of interest  is not 
homogeneous . So, if there  is a variation  in the soil and if you collect  randomly  there  is always  
chance  of locational  bias. So, this is called  simple  random  sampling.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:50)  
 
The third  is stratified  random  sampling , what  is stratified  random sampling?  Now , fields with 
significant  landscapes  or soil type variation  are divided  into separate  sampling  areas . So, you 
can see here there  are significant  variation  in these  suppose  here you can see there  are four 
zones .  
So, in this for zones  we can see significant  variation  of landscapes . So, from  a field that has 
been  divided  into these  sub units,  we can go for random  sub samples  from  each of these  units . 
So, first you divide  your field into some  sub units  based  on the several  features  like landscape  
features  and then you go ahead  and collect  the random  sample  from  each of these  subunits.   Now,  this design  is useful  when  the target  soil sample  is heterogeneous . So, when  we go for 
simple  random  sampling  that should  be useful  for a homogeneous  area.  However,  in case of 
stratified  random  sampling,  we should  apply  the stratified  random  sampling  when  the 
sampling  area is heterogeneous.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:09)  
 
Now,  there  are other  methods  of soil sampling  like grid sampling . So, what  is grid sampling ? 
Grid sampling  should  be used when  little information  is available  about  the variation  in the 
nutrient  level  across  the field. Suppose  you do not know  the special  variability  of the 
nutrients  across  the field. So, in that case,  you go with the grid sampling.   
Now,  grid samplin g involves  taking  samples  at regular  intervals  across  the landscape  of a 
field.  And there  are two methods  one is grid cell soil sampling  and then grid point  soil 
sampling . So, what  is grid cell soil sampling?  So, in case of grid cell soil sampling,  we 
gene rally randomly  collect  either  one or multiple  sub samples,  throughout  the cells for a 
composite  samples,  I will show  you the representation  in the coming  slide .  
So, here in case of this grid cell soil sampling,  generally,  we collect  one or multiple  sub 
samples  throughout  the cell for a composite  sample . So, we take towards  the samples  and 
then we mix them  together  to get a composite  sample.  Secondly  is the grid point  soil 
sampling . So, here,  we collect  either  one or multiple  sub samples  around  the geo reference  
points  within  a grid or at a grid intersections .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  22:40)  
 
So, if we see the first figure  shows  the cell sampling,  so, here you can see the whole  area can 
be divided , can be divided  into multiple  cells, can be represented  by multi ple cells and within  
each cell, we can take two or three  samples  and then mix them  together  to get a composite  
samples . So, this is one. And the second  is through  grid points  sampling . So, here you can see 
we are taking  the samples  at a particular  location  of the grid or at the intersection  of the grids . 
So, this is difference  between  cell sampling  and point  sampling .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  23:18)  
 
So, there  are different  types  of grid sampling  one is uniform  grid, you can see of course,  it 
gives  more  informa tion and but it also involves  higher  cost, because  we are involving  so 
much  of resources  to collect  these,  these  soil samples,  which  are higher  in number . So, in case of uniform  grid of course,  the number  of samples  will be more  and in that case,  there  
will be greater  cost, but at the same  time,  we will get more  information.  The second  one is 
called  the offset  grid, in which  we are not collecting  the soil samples  from  each of the group  
grid. Instead,  we are taking  the sample  in alternate  grids  or in grids  which are alternatively,  
we are taking  the soil sample .  
So, here you can see we are taking  soil sample  here in this grid and then another  sample  here, 
another  sample . So, we are taking  the samples  alternatively,  so, this is called  offset  grid, of 
course,  this is economical,  because  as compared  to the uniform  grid, because  in case of offset  
grid the number  of samples  are drastically  reduced.   
Then,  we can go with the stratified  random . So, in the stratified  random  you can see we are 
collecting  random  samples  within  each grid. So, to avoid  the systematic  bias and the third  and 
the fourth  one is rectangular  grid where  we are collecting  the samples  and we are capturing  
the directional  bias. So, these  are different  grid sampling  methods.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:16 ) 
 
Another  important  concept  is called  the zone  sampling,  what  is zone  sampling ? So, zone  
sampling  involves  dividing  the field into zones  that are uniform  enough  to be managed  as a 
whole  and then sampling  to determine  the average  soil test values  for this zone . So, the 
success  so, what  happens  in case of zone  sampling,  we basically  divide  the soils into several  
zones  which  are relatively  uniform  and then we can do the sampling  to determine  the average  
soil test values  in this zone .  So, the success  of this zone  sampling  relies  on the amount  and quality  of the data used to 
determine  the zones . So, it is very important  that for zoning  or zone  identification  you should  
apply  the highest  quality  data which  is available . So, if you missing  if you are missing  some 
amount  of area which  shows  or some  area which  shows  some  special  variability  that can 
create  problem  in cases  of zone  sampling . So, zone  sampling  should  be done  based  on the 
correct  data source  and then once  we define  these  zones,  we can collect  subseque nt samples  
from  each of these  zones.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  26:51)  
 
Then,  another method  is there  that is called  topographic  or geographic  unit sampling . So, we 
all know  that fields  vary in nature  between  such, in features  such as elevation , hilltops,  slopes  
or depressions.  And this topographic  or geographic  sampling  assumes  that these  features  
differ  in soil characteristics  and establish  unique  Zones .  
Of course,  we know  that Jenny  soil formation  theory  shows  that really  plays  a very important  
role in soil formation,  because  variation  of the relief  can create  different  types  of soils by 
changing  the elevation . So, if we divide  the fields  based  on their elevation  and other  features  
and then subsequently  we can collect  composite  sample  from  each of these  areas  that will be 
known  as a topographical  geog raphic  unit sampling.  
Topographic  and geographic  unit sampling  is also a very efficient  method  and gives  the and 
also ensures  capturing  the variability  which  is occurring  due to the variation  of the slope.  And 
so, these  are some  of the important  features  of soil chemical  analysis  and soil sampling  
methods.   However,  in general,  I will show  you in our next lecture,  that we generally  recommend,  you 
should  collect  at least 20 samples , 15 to 20 samples  per hectare  of area and generally,  we 
recommend  the farmers  to collect  the soil samples  in his zig zag fashion  to capture  the 
maximum  variability  of the soil properties  in the area of interest . So, we are going  to discuss  
those  in our next lecture,  but let us wrap  up this lecture  with this hybrid  sampling .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  29:15)  
 
So, this hybrid  sampling,  the goal of this hybrid  sampling  is to capture  the most  variability  
with the least number  of sampling . So, how we do that?  So, field is first divided  into zones  
with similar  productivity . So, what  do we do? So, we divide  this field into several  zones  
based  on similar  productivity  then each zone  sample d using  a traditional  cell based  approach . 
So, you can see it is a hybrid  approach  here we are using  both cell as well as the zones . So, 
this is a hybrid  sampling  approach .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  29:57 ) 
 
 
So, if we combine  all these  methods  together  what  are the advantages  and disadvantages ? 
You can see in case of standard  method,  few samples  per field are needed  and no need for 
GPS on GIS and less time and lower  cost. However,  there  are disadvantages  first of all, 
average  values  or recommendation  over large r areas . So, what  generally  in case a standard  
method  they generally  take a few soil samples  and then analyze  and then represent  the whole  
area,  but that can create  several,  that can create  the problem  of capturing  the spatial  
variability,  because  for capturing  the spatial  variability,  you need  more  samples.   
The second  method  is cell based  method,  where  less sampling  bias than standard  method  is 
there  and no cell size restrictions . So, these  are advantages  however,  there  are disadvantages  
also for example,  average  variability  over the cell area. So, whatever  the cell area it will, if it is 2 meter  by 2 meter  or 1 hectare  by 1 hectare,  then the average  variability  over the cell area 
will be represented  by one sample  only.  And it is also checkerboard  representation.   
Third  one is point  sampling  it is better  characterization  of field variability  and it creates  more  
realistic  model of underlying  soils and what  are the disadvantages,  it requires  closely  spaced  
samples  and additional  analysis  required  to develop  prescription  map which  is also known  as 
interpolation  maps.   
In case of zone  sampling,  the advantage  is it captures  the variability  with reduced  number  of 
samples . So, you can drastically  reduce  the number  of samples  by zone  method.  However,  
there  is a disadvantage  that potential  bias is there,  if not based  on yield  determining  factors . 
So, these  are several  advantages  and disadvantages  of the different  types  of sampling  
methods.   
And let us wrap  up this lecture  these  are the references  which  are used for this lecture.  And in 
our next lecture,  we are going  to discuss  how to collect  the soil samples  and how to process  
the soil samples  for subsequent  analysis.  Thank  you.  