Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture:  29 
Soil Testing  and Soil Fertility  Evaluation  Methods  (Contd.)  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:29 )  
 
Welcome  friends  to this sixth  week  of lectures  of NPTEL  online  certification  course  of Soil 
Fertility  and Fertilizers.  In this week,  we are discussing  about  soil testing  and soil fertility  
evaluation  methods.  And now,  we are going  to discuss  lecture  number  29. And in our 
previous  lectures  we have  discussed  about  the basis  for soil testing  and plant  testing  why we 
require  them  and what  are the basic  concepts  behind  soil fertility  on our plant  nutrition  status  
identification.   
We have  also discussed  the plant  based fertility  evaluation  and also we have  discussed  about  
the soil sample  process , soil basics  of soil testing,  what  should  be the optimum  depth  of 
collection?  What  are the different  types  of soil, sampling  procedure  or what  are the different  
types  of soil sampling  designs  or what  type of sample  collection  methods  we have  discussed  
simple  random  sampling,  then stratified  random  sampling,  zone  sampling,  grid sampling,  
hybrid  sampling,  zigzag  sampling,  what  are the different  types  of tools  which  we use for soil 
sample  collection,  we have  discussed . 
We have  also discussed  what  is the procedure  of soil sample  collection  then we have  
discussed  what  is furrow  slice how to collect  the V shape  the sample  from  the V shaped  cut and then how to develop  a composite  sample, what  are the criteria  for develop  for collecting  
the composite  sample  we have  discussed.   
So, now,  we are going  to discuss  some  of the way, you know  important  routine  soil tests for 
determination  of the soil pH, electrical  conductivity  and soil organi c matter  and available  
macronutrients  in this lecture.  
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  02:29)   
 
So, these  are the concepts  which  we are going  to cover  first of all Determination  of soil pH, 
then Determination  of soil electrical  conductivity  and then Determination  of soil organic  
matter , then Determination  of available  nitrogen , available  phosphorus  and available  
potassium.  So, these  are the very basic  and most  routine  soil tests which  we will get in most  
of the soil testing  laboratories.   
So, apart  from  that we also test micronutrients  and also lime requirement  and so, other  things,  
but for identification  for estimation  of the micronutrients,  we required  high valued  
instruments  like atomic  absorption  spectrophotometer  or ICP, which  we will be discussing  in 
our last lecture of this week.  However,  in this lecture,  we are going  to discuss  why soil pH 
and how we measure  the soil pH, how we measure  the soil electrical  conductivity,  what  are 
the process  of determination  of soil organic  matter , determination  of available  nitro gen, 
available  phosphorus  and available  potassium.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  03:38)   
 
  
So, these  are the keywords  of this lecture,  soil organic  matter , then available  nitrogen , 
available  phosphorus , available  potassium  and soil pH. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  03:50 ) 
 
  
So, remember  that soil pH is basically  a negative  logarithm  of hydrogen  and concentration.  
So, determination  of pH basically  measures  the hydrogen  and activity  in the soil water  system  
and these  pH influences  so many  other  soil fertility  parameters  that is why we first measured  
the soil pH in any soil testing  lab. So, the nutrient  availability  for example,  the nutrient  
availability  is maximum  at neutral  pH and decreases  with increased  acidity  or alkalinity.   So, unless  we know  the soil pH we do not understa nd what is the reason  behind  that nutrish 
available  nutri  you know  nutrient  content  at a particular  situation  also to determi ne what  type 
of extractant  we will be using  for determination  of soil parameters.  We require  the soil pH for 
example  in case of phosphorus  unless  we do not know  whether  the soil is alkaline  or acidic  in 
nature,  we will not be able to identify  which  method  we should  follow.   
So, that is why soil pH is a very important  parameter  we should  measure  and the principle  of 
soil pH measurement s says that the pH is measured  by a pH meter  in which  the potential  of 
the hydrogen  ion indicate  the indicating  electrode  is measured  potenti ometrically  against  the 
calomel  saturating  reference  electrodes.  So, there  are two electrodes , one is the, one is a thin 
glass  membrane  electrode  which  goes in direct  contact  with the soil solution , soil and water  
solution  and inside  the probe  there  is a reference  electrode.   
So, the potential  difference  that develops  when  we dip the probe  in the soil water  solution  
that creates  the, that is basically  the generating  force  of the soil pH measurement.  So, before  
measuring  the pH of the soil the instrument  has to be calibrated  with a standard  buffer  
solution  of known  pH and pH is also affected  by temperature  remember  that, so, the pH 
meters  should  be adjusted  to the local  or the room  environment  temperature  also. So, what  we 
do basically  we make  a soil water  suspension  and then we dip the probe  of soil pH meter  to 
measure  the soil pH of that you know  how to measure  the soil pH. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  06:59 ) 
 
  
So, this is a digital  pH meter  and as you can see, this is the soil probe,  I am just indicating  
here in the screen.  So, this is the pH probe  and this is the pH meter.  And as you can see, there  are different  types  of this is the pH scale.  So, based  on this pH scale,  you can say whether  the 
soil is acidic  or alkaline.  So, neutral  pH generally  you know  ranges  from  6.5 to 7.5 the neutral  
proper  neutral  pH is 7 and of course,  as you go beyond  7 that increases  the alkalinity  and go 
below  7 that increases  the acidity.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  07:44)   
 
  
So, what  is the procedure  of soil pH determination.  So, we first create  a suspension  of soil to 
water  like 1 is to 2 volume  you know  suspension  and so, we and then for example,  we can 
take you know  20 gram  of soil in a 100 ml beaker  and 40, and we add 40 ml of distilled  water  
and the suspension  is stirred  at regular  interval  for 30 minutes  and why we stirred  that, we stir 
that to ensure  that all the hydrogen  ions comes  from  the soil surfac e to the soil water,  so that 
we can measure  their activity  in the suspension.   
So, once  we do this stirring  intermittently  for 30 minutes,  then we measure  the pH by 
immersing  the electrode  in the suspension  electrode  or probe.  So, for soils containing  the high 
salts,  the pH should  be determined  using  0.01 Molar  calcium  chloride  solution.  Now  once  we 
have measured  the soil pH, how to interpret . 
So, if the soil pH is less than 5 we call it strongly  acidic  soil, if it is 5.1 to 6.5, we call it 
slightly  acidic  soil, if it is from  6.6 to 7.5, we call it a neutral  soil. If it is from  7.6 to 8, we 
call it mildly  alkaline  soil and if it is more  than 8 we call it strongly  alkaline  soil. So, 
depending  on the soil pH, you can interpret  you know  you can interpret  whethe r it is suitable  
for any specific  crop or not based  on the availability  of the nutrients.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  09:33)   
 
So, the second  most  important  parameter  we generally  measure  is the electrical  conductivity.  
Now,  these  amounts  of salts,  soluble  salts in a sample  is generally  expressed  in terms  of 
electrical  conductivity  and generally  measured  by a conductivity  meter.  So the principle  of 
the conductivity  meter  is based  on the Wheatstone  bridge  principle.  So we already  know  what  
is Wheatstone  bridge  principle  or Wheatstone  bridge  circuit  So, this is a Wheatstone  bridge  
circuit  and as you can see here,  the bridge  consists  of two known  and fixed  resistance.   
So, these  are r1 and r2 and one variable  resistance  which  is r4 and an unknown  resistance  that 
is r3. So, the variable  resistance  r4 can be adjusted  until a minimum  or 0 current  flows  
through  the AC galvanometer  and this is based  on this principle,  we generally  measure  the 
soil electrical  conductivity.   
Now,  why electrical  conductivity  gives  the measurem ent of soil salts? Because,  you know  
salts are made  up of cations  and anions  and these  cations  and anions  are the major  conductor  
of electricity  in the soil. So, in any you know,  in the soil system,  so, if we measure  the 
conductivity  of a soil or electrica l conductivity  of the soil that will indirectly  interpret  the soil 
concentration . 
Of course,  if this if a soil has more  amount  of soils that will have  higher  electrical  
conductivity  because  they will have  more  ions to conduct  the electric  you know  to condu ct 
the elect , the electricity  so, as a result  of that, you know  we generally  measure  the electrical  
conductivity  for determining  the soluble  salts in the soil. (Refer  Slide  Time:  11:35)   
 
  
Now,  what  is the procedure ? So, generally  we take 20 grams  of dried and processed  soil or 
dried  ground  soils in 100 ml beaker  and then we add 40 ml of distilled  water  and shake  
intermittently  just like pH for 30 minutes  and then we can determine  the conductivity  of the 
supernatant  liquid  with the help of a conductivity  meter and the electrical  conductivity  of a 
saturation  extract  is also determined  for salinity  ratings .  
So, remember  there  are different  from  methods  of measurement  of soil pH and soil electrical  
conductivity  sometimes,  we create  a saturated  paste  by mixing  the water  directly  into the soil 
and making  a paste  and keep it one night  for equilibration  and then we in the next day we 
directly  dip the electrode  in the soil to measure  the soil pH and electrical  conductivity . 
Sometime  we do 1 is to 2 soil water  suspe nsion  and then we measure  the soil pH and 
electrical  conductivity . Sometime  we do the saturation  extract  that means  we saturate  the soil 
with distilled  water  and then we extract  the set you know  from  those  from  that saturated  soil 
and then we measure  the electrical  conductivity  of that saturation  extract.   
So, this is another  method  of measurement  of soil electrical  conductivity.  So, there  are 
different  methods.  So, how to interpret  the soil salinity.  So, if the electrical  conductivity  is 
measured  and then generally  the unit of the electrical  conductivity  is decisiveness  per meter.  
So, if it is more  than 4 decisiveness  per meter , 4 decisiveness  per meter,  the electrical  
conductivity  then we call it a saline  soil if it is less than 4 then we call it a non-saline soil. So, 
this is the general  threshold  value  for differentiating  a saline  soil from  a non-saline  soil. (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:35 ) 
 
  
The third  important  property  we generally  measured  in a routine  soil test is the organic  matter  
or soil organic  matter . Now,  the principle  says that a suitable  quantity  of the soil is digested  
with potassium  dichromate  and sulfuric  acid.  So, here generally  we take the soil sample  and 
then we mix it with the potassium  dichromate  and sulfuric  acid.   
Now,  this potassium  dichromate  generally  oxidize  whatever  carbon  is there  in the soil. And 
then the excess  amount  of K2Cr2O 7 or potassium  dichromate  which  is leftover  unreduced  by 
the soil organic  matter  is determined  by titration  with standard  ferrous  ammo nium  sulfate  
solution  using diphenylamine  as an indicator.  Remember  that here whatever  carbon  is there  in 
the soil in the presence  of K2Cr2O7  or potassium  dichromate  and sulfuric  acid it oxidized  
into carbon  dioxide  and K2Cr2O7  generally  reduced.   
So when  all the carbon  which  is present  in the soil is oxidized  and some  amount  of K2Cr2O7  
is generally  left on reduced.  So we measured  that unreduced  K2Cr2O7  by standard  by 
titrating  against  the standard  ferrous  ammonium  sulfate  solution  using  the diphenylamine  
indicator  and then from  there  we can identify,  this is the amount  of K2Cr2O7  which  has been  
already  consumed  by for oxidation  of carbon  to carbon  dioxide.  So, this is the organic  carbon  
present  in the soil. 
So, for this generally  we take excess  amount  of K2CrO7 , so, that there  must be some  amount  
left or unreduced  after the conversion  of carbon  to carbon  dioxide.  So, what  is the process ? 
The process  is first of all we take 1 gram  of soil samples  in a 500 ml of conical  flask  then we 
add 10 ml of 1 normal  potassium  dichromate  and 20 ml of concentrated  H2SO4  and mix thoroughly  the mixture  and then allow  the reaction  to proceed  for 30 minutes , so, we keep  it 
for 30 minutes.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:01 ) 
 
  
And then we dilute  the reaction  mixture  with 200 ml of water  10 drops of phosphoric  acid 
and 10 ml of sodium  fluoride  solution  and 2 ml of diphenylamine  and then we titrate  the 
solution  with standard  ferrous  ammonium  sulfate  to bright  to get the brilliant  green  color.   
So, a blank  without  soil should  be also run simultaneously  for calcula tion of the organic  
carbon,  I have  not shown  here the calculation  of the organic  carbon  you can see it in the 
standardized  book.  Now,  once  we get the organic  carbon  remember  that the method  will give 
us the organic  carbon  this this method  is also known  as Walkley  and Black  method.   
So, because  we and it is named  by the same  from , the again  you know,  names,  Walkley  and 
Black  suggest  the, this process  was first published  by these  two scientists  to Walkley  and 
Black  in the year 1934  and it was published  in a journal  called  soil science.   
So, once  in this Walkley  and Black method  the extract  the extraction  of organic  carbon  is 
around  77 percent . So, whatever  we get the result  from  the calculation  we have  to multiply  
with 1.33 to get the actual  organic  carbon.  So, once  we get the actual  organic  carbon  
considering  the 77 percent  recovery,  then we can interpret  based  on the scale.   
So, if it is less than 0.5 then we call it a low organic  carbon,  if it has organic  carbon  content,  
you know  from  0.5 to 0.75 percent , we call it medium  or concentration  of organic  carbon  and if it is having  high concentration,  it should  have  more  than 0.75 percent  of organic  carbon.  
Now,  how to convert  these  organic  carbons  to organic  matter  soil organic  matter.   
So, to convert  this organi c carbon  to soil organic  matter,  we have to multiply  it with the 1.724  
which  is also known  as Van Bemmelen  factor.  So, this Van Bemmelen  factor  is generally  
calculated  or you know,  we derived  this Van Bemmelen  factor  as 1.724  because  we assume  
that in organic matter  content  around  58 percent  of organic  carbon.   
So, if we consider  that organic  matter  consists  of 58 percent  of carbon,  then to convert  the 
organic  carbon  to organic  matter,  we have  to multiply  it with this Van Bammelen  factor  or 
1.724.  So, this is how we get the soil organic  matter.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:00)   
 
  
The next important  parameter  which  we measure  in the laboratory  is the available  nitrogen  or 
plant  available  soil nitrogen  and this is estimated  by the micro  gentle  method.  Now  remember  
in the soil nitrogen  present  in basically  organic  and inorganic  form  however,  maximum  
amount  of nitrogen  remain  in organic  form,  which  cannot  be used by the plants.  Now  amount  
of plant  available  nitrogen  in soil depends  upon  nitrogen  mineralization,  which  again depends  
on carbon  to nitrogen  ratio or CN ratio.   
Plant  can uptake  only ammonium  and nitrate  from  the now from  of nitrogen  we know  that. 
So, though  they,  you know,  together  hardly  occupy  1 percent  of the total nitrogen  in normal  
soil. So, it is theref ore necessary  to estimate  the different  forms  of mineralized  are available  
nitrogen  and so, this alkaline  potassium  permanganate  method,  it was given  by the Subbiah  and Asija  in 1956  and we generally  use this method  for determination  of soil available  
nitrogen.   
So, what  we do what  is a principle  behind  this idea, for estimation  of available  nitrogen.  So, 
here a known  weight  of soil is treate d with an excess  of alkaline  KMnO4  or potassium  
permanganate  which  extract  easily  oxidizable  fraction  of organic  matter and ammonia  
evolved  is absorbed  and as a result  there  is evolution  of ammonia.  So, the ammonia  evolved  
is absorbed  in a known  volume  of standard  acid the excess  of which  is titrated  against  
standard  alkali  using  methyl  red as an indicator.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:53)   
 
Now,  remember  guys  there  are different  versions  or different  variation  of this method.  
However,  in principle,  this is the crux of the Subbiah  and Asija  based  method,  you will see 
that people  are also using  different  types  of other  reagents  for absorption  of ammonia  and 
titration  but, that is also fine.  
So, these  are the basic  reaction  you can see here in the first reaction,  potassium  permanganate  
in the alkaline  medium,  it produced  this manganese  oxide  and then potassium  hydroxide  and 
this nascent  oxygen  and this nascent  oxygen  basically  reacts  with amino  acids  to create  the 
oxidative  deamination  and creating  the ammonia , evolving  the ammonia  gas.  
So, these  ammonia  reacts  with water  to produce  this ammonium  hydroxide  in the distillation  
process and then these  ammonium  hydroxides  can be absorbed  in H2SO4  or sulfuric  acid to 
produce  the ammonium  sulfate  and the excess  amount  of H2SO4 , can be you know  titrated  against  sodium  hydroxide  to measure  this plant  availa ble nitrogen.  So, this is how this 
process  basically  operates.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:17 ) 
 
So, the procedure  says that first you take 20 gram  of soil in a distillation  flask,  then you add 
20 ml of water  and 100 ML of 0.32 percent  of potassium  permang anate  solution  and then you 
pipette  out 25 ml of N by 50 or 0.02 normal  of sulfuric  acid in a conical  flask , you should  add 
2 to 3 drops  of methyl  red indicator  and dip the end of the delivery  tube into it and you have  
to pour 100 ml of 2.5 percent  solution  into the flask  and cork it immediat ely. 
And distill  the ammonia  glass  from  the distillation  flask  and collect  it in the H2SO4  solution . 
Continue  distillate  till the evolution  of the ammonia  seizes  completely  and you can test it by 
bringing  a moist  red litmus  paper  near the outlet  of the condenser  which  will turn blue as long 
as the ammonia  is being  evolved.  And when  it stopped  turning  into blue,  then you can 
understand  okay  no further  ammonia  is evolving.  So, you can stop the distillation  process  . 
Then you should  titrate  the excess  amount  of H2SO4  which  you have  taken  against  this 0.02 
normal  of sodium  hydroxide  and note down  the volume  of sodium  hydroxide  used. The end 
point  is reached  when  the color  changes  from  pink to yellow.  So, this is how you measure  the 
soil available  nitrogen.  (Refer Slide  Time:  23:41)   
 
  
This is the calculation.  So, if you have  taken  20 grams  of soil and volume  of sulfuric  acid 
taken  25 ml, volume  of 0.02 normal  sodium  hydroxide  taken  is X ml and volume  of so the 
volume  of N by 50 acid use for ammonia  absorption  is 25 minus  X ml. So, now 1 ml of n by 
50 H2SO4  is 0.02 equivalent  of nitrogen  which  is 0.00028  gram  of nitrogen  and so therefore,  
we can calculate  the percent  of available  nitrogen.  So, this is the percentage  of available  
nitrogen  in ppm.   
So, this is the percentage  of available  nitrogen  once  you get the percentage  of available  
nitrogen  you have  to multiply  it with the 10,000  because  you know  1 percent  equals  to 10,000  
ppm.  So, you will get the values  Z that is in ppm.  Now,  if you have  to convert  this ppm value 
to kg per hectare  value,  you have  to multiply  it with the 2.24 factor.  So you will get the 
nitrogen , available  nitrogen  in kg per hectare.   
So how to interpret  the results.  So in general,  in Indian  condition,  if the available  nitrogen  is 
less than 272 kg per hectare,  then we call it a low amount  of nitrogen . When it is 272 to 544 
kg per hectare,  then we call it a medium  amount  of nitrogen  available  nitrogen . If it is more  
than 544 kg of nitrogen  then we call it a high nitrogen  content.  So this is how we interpret  the 
result.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  25:18)   
 
Now,  the next important  parameter  is the soil available  phosphorus.  Now,  there  are two 
methods  however  here I will, you know,  I will mention  I will discuss  only one method.  So, 
one method  which  is gener ally used for neutral  to alkaline  pH of the soil that is called  Olson's  
method  and this method  generally  use 0.5 Molar  of sodium  bicarbonate  at a nearly  constant  
pH of 8.5. So, what  happens  so, the phosphate  ion in the solution  treated  with basically  
ascor bic acid in an acidic  mediu m, which  provides  a blue color  complex.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:57)   
 
  
So, in the Olsen  method,  so, here you can see there,  the different  types  of reagents  we use, we 
use either  0.5 Molar  of sodium  bicarbonate  solution,  we use also activated  charcoal  to remove  any color  interference,  we also use 0.5 normal  of sulfuric  acid solution  and then we can create  
a reagent  A. So, reagent  A is basically  dissolving  12 gram  of ammonium  paramolybdate  in 
250 ml of distilled  water  and then we dissolve  0.2908  gram  of potassium  antimony  tartrate  in 
100 ml of distilled  water.   
So, both solution  mix thoroughly  and made  1 liter in volumetric  flask  with the help of 
distilled  water  and these  dissolve  reagents  to 1 liter of 0 or 5 normal sort of sulfuric  acid.  So, 
this is reagent  A and ascorbic  acid working  solution  is also known  as reagent  B. So, you 
dissolve  1.056  gram  of ascorbic  acid in 200 ml of reagent  A, this ascorbic  acid also known  as 
reagent  B should  be prepared  as required  because  it does not keep more  than 24 hours.   
So, you cannot  keep  it for more  than 24 hours.  And apart  from  that you have  to create  the 
standard  phosphate  solution  by dissolving  the potassium  dihydrogen  in phosphate  in a double  
distilled  water  for development  of the standard  curve. Remem ber for (())(27:32)  
measurement,  you are required  to develop  a standard  curve.  
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  27:38 ) 
 
So, how to prepare  the standard  curve.  So, you take different  concentration  of phosphates  
solution  and in 25 ml volumetric  flask.  So, first you create  a 2 ppm working  solution  standard  
phosphorous  solution  and from  there  you take 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 ml and in a 25 ml of volumetric  
flask  and then you add 5 ml of 0.5 Molar  of sodium  bicarbonate  extracting  solution  rolls and 
extractant  to each of these  flask  and acidify  with 5 normal  sulfuric  acid drop by drop and then 
add about  10 ml of distilled  water  and 4 ml of reagent  B then shake  the solution , make  the volume  of 25 ml by distilled  water  and the intensity  of the, there  will be a blue color  
development.   
So the intensity  of the blue color  is red on spectrophotometer  is 660 nanometer  wavelength  
after 10 minutes  and plot the curve  by taking  phosphorus  concentration  on x axis and 
colorimetric  reading  on y axis, repeat  the process  till you get the straight  line relationship  and 
then calculate  the factor  that is you know  colorimeter  reading  is equal  to how much  ppm of 
phosphorus  and from  there  you can calculate  from  the unknown  sample.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  28:53)   
 
  
So, the procedure  if you have  a soil sample,  how to do the phosphorus  estimation.  So, this is a 
calorimeter  which  you can use to measure  the soil phosphate  concentration.  So, first of all, 
you have  to take 2.5 grams  of soil sample  in 150 ml of conical  flask  and you add 0.5 gram  of 
this activ ated charcoal  then you add this 50 ml of this Olson  reagents  and then shake  for 30 
minutes  and in a shaker  and similar  process  run for a blank  without  the soil and then you 
filter  the suspension  through  the Whatman  40 paper  and then take 5 ml of a liquid  of the 
extract  every  25 ml of volumetric  flask  and acidify  with 5 normal  H2SO4  and you know  add 
small  quantity  of distilled  water  and then add 4 ml of reagent  B and the intense  there  will be 
blue color  development.  Due to this ascorbic  acid and you have  to read the color  at 660 
nanometer  wavelength  after 10 minutes.   
So you have  to keep  it for 10 minutes  for color  development  and then you measure  the 
intensity.  So these  are the measurement  and calculations,  so, weight  of the sample  here 2.5 
grams , volume  of the extract ant 50 ml, volume  of filtrate  5 ml, absorbance  R absorbance  from  the standard  curve  A and concentration  of phosphorus  for absorbance  A equal  to B ppm.  
So, the this is how you calculate  available  phosphorus  and these  are the interpretations.   
So, if it is less than 5 kg of phosphorus  per hectare,  then it is very low, 5 to 10 kg then it is 
low, from  10 to 20 kg phosphorus  it is medium , 20 to 40 kg it is high and very high is more  
than 40 kg. So, this is how you calculate  the phosphorus  and estimate  the phosphorus  
available  phosphorus . Now, to convert  this phosphorus  to available  P2O5 we had to multiply  
with a factor  2.29.   
So, this is an important  factor  that you know  to convert  this phosphorus  to for P2O5 , because  
this P2O5  calculation  is required  because  most  of the fertilizer  elements  are calculated  based  
on this P2O5 content.  So, generally  we also estimate  or interp ret the values  in terms  of P2O5  
then using  simple  P. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  31:14 ) 
 
  
So, the next process  is determination  of available  potassium  in the soil. So, the principle  says 
that a large  number  of elements , so generally  we use the flame  photometry  process  a large  
number  of elements  when  excited  in a flame  emits  radiation  of characteristic  wavelengths.   
So, the excitation  cause  one of the outer  electrons  of neutral  atoms  to move  to an outer  orbit  
of a higher  energy  level  or the atoms  may be excited  sufficiently  lose an electron  completely  
from  the attractive  force  of the nucleus  and where  the excitation  excited  atom  returns  to the 
lower energy  level  the light at characteristic  wavelength  is emitted.   So, basically  it is you know  it is basically  exciting  and you know  the outer  electrons  of a 
neutral  atoms  to move  and outer  orbit of higher  energy  levels.  And then when  it returns  back  
to the lower  energy  level,  then it remits  the light at a characteristic  wavelength  that we 
measure  that emitted  light to identify  the concentration  of a particular  element.   
So, the apparatus  which  we generally  use flame  photometer  with red filter  and apart  from  that 
also we use pipette , volumetric  flask  and conical  flask.  So we will discuss  the procedure  in 
our next lecture,  we will see how we can measure  the available  potassium  and we will also 
discuss  the principle  of we will show  how these  flame  photomete r is used to measure  the soil 
potassium  in details  and also we will also see the interpretation  of the potassium  results  and 
how to interpret  them  into high,  medium  and low. So we will discuss  all these  in our next 
lecture.  And so please  stay tuned.  And if you have  any question,  please  feel free to post your 
queries  in the forum.  Thank  you. 