Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture 20 
Soil Secondary Nutrients and Their Role in  Plant Nutrition (Contd.)  
Welcome  friends to this las t lecture  of week 4  and this is the 20th lecture of week 4  of 
NPTEL  online certification course  of Soil Fertility and Fertilizers and in  this week 4,  we are 
talking about Soil Secondary Nutrients and Their Role in  Plant Nutrition . So, in the previous 
four lectures  of this week , we have discussed  three  secondary  nutrients  in the soil like 
calcium , magnesium and  sulfur . So,  we have also  discussed  their roles  for plant growth  and 
metabolism  and also we have seen their  sources .  
We have  described the sulphur cycle, calcium cycle  and magnesium cycle . We have seen , in 
case of calcium  and magnesium , we have seen their different types of sources like primary  
minerals and also  how they are attached to different types  of secondary minerals  in the 
exchangeable form as well as  in the  intel and as well as in the  layered structures , within the 
layer  structures , specifically , for magnesium  in the octahedral coordination we have 
discussed .  
We have also seen that how  these different solid phases of these  three  secondary nutr ients 
remain  in equilibrium  with the soil  solution from where  these ions are up taken by plant 
roots . We have seen their available forms . In case of sulphur , they are available in the form of  
sulfate , in case of calcium they are  available  as calcium t wo plus ion and also in case  of 
magnesium they are available  as magnesium two plus ion .  
Sulfur  is highly  correlated with biological properties because  it is a constituent , it is an 
important constituent of  several amino acids and these amino  acids create  diffe rent types of  
proteins  for building the plant body . In case of calcium , we have seen  that they are 
indispensable for plant  growth because they take part in  cell wall formation as well as cell  
division .  
And in case of magnesium , magnesium  governs the chlor ophyll synthesis  because it is an 
important component , structural component of chlorophyll . And without the chlorophyll plant 
cannot  execute  photosynthesis . So,  these three  elements although , they are required in  less quantity , lesser quantity than  primary  minerals like calcium , like nitrogen phosphorous and 
potassium , they are also indispensable .  
So, we have seen also  their different types of sources  calcium fertilizers , magnesium  
fertilizers as well as  sulphur fertilizers we have seen . So, also we have d iscussed what are the  
factors like pH organic matter and other  soil factors which affect the  availability of these 
three secondary  nutrients to the plants .  
(Refer Slide Time: 0 4:20) 
 
So, in this last lecture , we are going to  cover this four major concept s. First of all , we are  
going to discuss  the sulphur status of  Indian subcontinent , specifically in  India and also  
antagonism , nutrient  antagonism and nutrient synergism . We are also going to discuss 
agronomic  efficiency of magnesium  and also  what is the r elationship  between these nutrients 
and soil  Ph. We are going to cover these four  important concepts .  (Refer Slide Time: 0 4:55) 
 
These are some of the keywords which you  are going to discuss . First of all  antagonism then 
synergism then  sulphur fertilize r use agronomic efficiency and  pH. So, these are some of the 
keywords which  we are going to discuss in this lecture .  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:12) 
 
So, if we see , the sulphur status of Indian soil as  published by Shukla et. al. in 2019 , we can 
see this pie c hart and in this pie chart it  is quite clear  that almost  29.4 percent of the Indian 
soils are  deficient  with sulfur and  latent deficient is 17.8 percent of the  soil marginal 
sufficient is 12.1 percent of  the soils , adequate  sulphur can be  found in only  11.6 percent of the soil . High  in 17.7 percent of  the soil and acute deficient can be  found in case of 11.4 
percent .  
So, only we can see  that around  29 to 30 percent of the  sulphur is adequate or more than 
adequate or high  concentration in the Indian soils . So, around 70 percent of  the soils in India 
shows different levels of  deficiency , starting from acute  deficiency , then deficiency , latent  
deficiency and marginal sufficiency . So,  these are , this is the status of  sulphur content in 
Indian soil .  
(Refer Slid e Time: 06:45 ) 
 
Now,  if we see the  sulphur uptake  by different types of crops  as a function  of the growth 
stage and also if we can , if you want to see the percentage of  total sulphur as a function of the 
growth  stage , they accumulate as a function  of the growth stage , we can see  this graph . And 
we can clearly see  that in case of leaf blades , the sulphur content increases  and increases  with 
an exponential  rate and then reaches a plateau  and goes from there .  
Secondly , in case  of st alk and leaf she aths, the sulphur content also increases and then 
slightly  decreases and continue to  decrease with the growth stage or  growing degree days . 
And also we have seen in case of tassel , cob or husk leaves , the same trend  we can  see, 
however in case of grain , we can see  with the  increase of growth stage , we can  see there is an 
increase in the  sulphur uptake by the grain . So,  that shows the importance of this secondary 
nutrient  for plant growth as well as for their  production .  (Refer Slide Time: 0 8:10) 
 
Now,  if you want to see the relationship  between  sulphur and different crops , so, this bar 
diagram also gives us some idea  about long-term changes in  sulphur response to different 
crops varies from  1997 to 2016 . And in this graph you can see  rice, wheat, maize, pulses , 
soybean , peanut  and mustard and the figure in the  parentheses indices the number of  
experiments .  
So, you can see  that the ill response  to sulphur is conti nuously increasing from, for all the 
crops , since 1990 to 97  to 1997 to 2006  and so you can see there is  a, of course , there is a 
clear difference  between the yield response to  sulphur in during 1997 to 2006 as compared to  
1990 to 97 .  
However , from 2006 to 16 , except for the pulses and also maiz e, in all the cases like in case 
of rice , then wheat , then soyb ean and peanut and mustard , the ill response to  sulphur has 
decreased as compared to the ill  response to  sulphur during 1997 to 2006 . This research was 
published by Shukla et. al. in 2019 . So,  that gives us the idea about the ill response to 
sulphur , the t emporal  changes in ill response to  sulphur for different crops in different , for 
last almost 30 years .  (Refer Slide Time: 10:09 ) 
 
So, if we see , this is the guidelines for  sulphur fertilizer use  and you can see here , depending 
on different types of mate rials the  guidelines and special remarks are given . So,  if it is an 
elemental  sulphur or dispersible granular Sulphur , ammonium  phosphate sulfur , so, the 
guidelines shows  that direct application and bulk blends , apply material several months 
before  this growing season , fall applications are encouraged .  
That means, in the monsoon months , this is recommended . Allow for dispersion before  
incorporation of  broadcast applications . So,  ammonium sulphate  is recommended for direct 
application  and bulk blends , effec tive any time . So,  ammonium sulphate is effective at any  
time for direct application .  
And then ammonium nitrate sulphate , ammonium phosphate sulphate , potassium  sulphate , 
potassium magnesium sulphate , these are also effective for direct  application and ef fective 
any time . Then calcium sulfate  is helpful in  for direct application  and also they are effective  
any time . Calcium sulphate dehydrate  or gypsum .  
Then  ammonium thiosulfate , potassium thiosulfate , calcium  thiosulfate , they are also 
recommended  for di rect application and also blending  with the fluid fertilizers and broadcast  
preplant or applied in starters , and then also top dress on certain crops , however , in the low 
rate. And also they are recommended to add through  open -ditch and irrigation systems .  
In case of ammonium polysulphide and potassium  polysulphide , you can go with the direct  
application and blending with the  nitrogen solution , we can inject it into  the soil , we can broadcast  with water  dilution . And then single pre plant  application can be also possible and  
repeated application in low rates  through open -ditch irrigation system is  also possible for 
these two  polysulphide fertilizers .  
In case of  sulphuric acid , mixing with ammonium  polyphosphate and anhydrous ammonia for  
clear liquid blends i s recommended . And suspension containing  sulphur is, and also 
suspension containing sulphate are also recommended and their  guidelines is given . 
Suspension  containing  sulphur is recommended for  direct application and in case of  
suspension containing  sulpha te can be  applicable at any time . So,  these shows  the proper 
guideline  of sulphur fertilizer we use. We have  already seen different types of  sulphur 
fertilizer and their  sulphur content . So, these are the guidelines for their  application .  
(Refer Slide Tim e: 13:15 ) 
 
Now,  another important  terminology  in the field of soil  fertility is nutrient antagonism . What  
is nutrient antagonism?  Nutrient antagonism is when an excess of  a particular element  blocks 
the absorption  of another element , the plant needs and  can happen and it can happen with 
any, with elements of a similar size and  charge , either positive or negative . So, this is called 
nutrient antagonism . So, in nature or specifically in soil , we can see different types of nutrient  
antagonism . The opposite of  this nutrient  antagonism is called nutrient synergism . Also  we 
can see synergism between  several elements like nitrogen and  sulphur .  (Refer Slide Time: 14:04 ) 
 
So, let us discuss element wise , what type of  interactions they have  with other  elements . So, 
let us talk about nitrogen . So,  when high levels of nitrogen  is there that can induce  
accelerated growth rates , levels of micronutrient  that would normally be marginal can be  
deficient .  
So, when there is a high level of  nitrogen  and which can induce the  vigorous growth that can 
sometime produce  the deficiency of the  micronutrients which are marginal . Now,  high soil 
levels of nitrogen , you will  see in later  that high analysis fertilizers create  the micro nutrient 
deficiency when  we will discuss the micron utrients .  
So, similarly , high analysis fertilizer means  a fertilizer that contains more than 30  percent of 
the nutrient , available form  of the nutrient . So, high level of  nitrogenous fertilizer can induce 
the micro nutrients  deficiency because of  vigorous growth . Because  when there will  be 
vigorous growth there will be more  requirement .  
So, when the  micronutrients  are marginal in the soil  that would create the nutrient  deficiency . 
So, high soil levels of nitrogen can  have the synergism effect with  phosphor us, calcium , 
boron , iron and zinc  but an excess can , excess of nitrogen can  dilute these elements . Low soil 
levels can reduce the  phosphorous , calcium , boron , iron and zinc  uptake and ammonium 
nitrogen can make  molybdenum deficiency app ear less obvious . So, these are some of the 
interactions of  nitrogen with other elements .  Now,  if you  talk about phosphorous , high level of  phosphorous reduce zinc and to a lesser  
degree calcium uptake . So,  we can see a  very clear and nutrient antagonism between 
phosphorus a nd zinc . We will see  this in our  discussion of  micronutrients in our coming 
weeks .  
So, there is a clear antagonistic  relationship between phosphorus and zinc . It is antagonistic to 
boron in low  pH soils also , this phosphorus . Now,  for potassium . Potassium , high levels  of 
potassium reduce  magnesium , high levels of potassium reduce magnesium and  to lesser 
extent calcium , iron, copper , manganese and zinc uptake  and so, boron levels can either be 
low or  toxic .  
So, low levels can accentuate iron  deficiency . So, we can see that in case of  potassium , it can 
have antagonistic relationship  with magnesium  and to some lesser extent with calcium , iron, 
copper , manganese and zinc . Calcium , now, in case of calcium , high levels of calcium can  
accentuate boron deficiency .  
So, liming can decrease the uptake of the  boron , copper , iron, manganese and zinc by  raising 
the soil piece . So, when we apply  lime in the soil , of course , that increases the  pH of the soil 
and when  they increase the  pH of the soil that  decreases the ava ilability or uptake of  these 
nutrients like boron , copper , iron, manganese and zinc .  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:35 ) 
 
So, we can see  also in case of copper , high levels of  copper can accentuate molybdenum and 
to a lesser degree of iron , magnesium , zinc deficie ncy. In case of iron , iron deficiency can be accentuated by liming . Because  when we apply lime that  increases the soil pH and 
consequently  there is an iron deficiency .  
Also , iron deficiency can be accentuated by  low potassium levels or high levels of  copp er, 
manganese and zinc . In case of manganese , high level of  copper , high levels of copper , iron 
or zinc can accentuate manganese deficiency . So,  we can clearly see the antagonistic  
relationship between copper , iron, zinc and manganese , especially , when rep eated  soil 
applications of iron is there .  
Uptake can be decreased by liming  because when we increase the soil  pH that decrease the 
manganese  availability or increased by  sulphur application because their effect on the  pH. So, 
molybdenum , deficiencies can be accentuated by high levels of copper and  to a lesser degree 
of manganese .  
Now,  uptake can be, this should be  manganese . So, lesser degree of manganese  uptake can be 
also adversely affected by  sulphates . Uptake  can be increased by  phosphates and liming . So, 
when we apply  phosphates and liming that can improve  the molybdenum availability in the 
plant  or uptake of molybdenum into the plant .  
Zinc uptake can be decreased by high  phosphorus level . We have already  discussed there is a 
clear  antagonistic relat ionship between  phosphorous and zinc. And liming of high  levels of 
copper  and liming or  high levels of copper , iron and manganese , so, we can see that zinc also 
have  antagonistic relationship with liming or  high levels of copper , iron and manganese .  
Zinc deficiencies are often associated  with manganese deficiencies , especially , in citrus . So, 
we can see that there , these  nutrient antagonisms are very complex  relationship between these 
elements and  one element  can be present in antagonistic  relationship  with one or more 
elements or the same  time that particular element can be  present , can show than synergistic  
relationship for other elements .  (Refer Slide Time: 20:15 ) 
 
So, if we see the antagonistic relationship between  potassium and magnesium , they it ca n be 
easily seen here . So,  potassium has an  antagonistic or inhibiting effect on the  absorption of 
magnesium . So,  this is the  way there is a balanced  potassium  magnesium ratio is there . So,  
you can see  roots are absorbing both .  
However , when  there is a hi gh potassium and low , high potassium that would decrease the  
magnesium uptake . So, you can see clearly there is  an antagonistic relationship . And also the 
opposite is also true , when there is  a high magnesium and lo w cal, that would also  decrease 
the potas sium absorption also . So,  there is a  clear  antagonistic relationship  between 
magnesium and  potassium .  (Refer Slide Time: 21:12 ) 
 
So, this pictorial  description  gives a bit better idea about the  synergism , strong antagonism 
and light  antagonism between d ifferent types of  plant  essential elements . So,  we can see , 
calcium  has antagonistic relationship with  magnesium , potassium and then we they  have the 
antagonistic relationship with  phosphorus , then boron , then zinc , then magnesium .  
We can also see magnesi um has  synergistic relationship with Sulphur , potassium has 
synergistic , sorry , manganese has synergistic relationship  with Sulphur , potassium has 
synergistic  relationship with both manganese as well  as iron , whereas phosphorus has  
antagonistic relationshi p with zinc , magnesium has  a synergistic relationship with  
phosphorous .  
And also nitrogen has synergistic  relationship with magnesium , synergistic  relationship with  
sulphur and light antagonism with potassium and  also boron . So,  this gives us a very clear  
idea about which  nutrients , the relationship between different  types of nutrients in terms of 
synergism  and antagonism .  (Refer Slide Time: 22:36 ) 
 
Now,  if we see the agronomic efficiency of  magnesium , it is actually published paper by 
Wang et. al. in 2020, so, where we  can see that agronomic efficiency of  magnesium fertilizer 
in different crops . So,  we can see that  in case of fruit crops , it varies from ; the agronomic 
efficiency varies from  around 40 to 80 kg per hectare , in case  of grasses , in case of tobacco  
they are generally from around they are from minus 20 to plus 40.  
And also we can see these  variations are also there in case of tea  and other crops and also for 
oil crops , we can see this large variation from  both negative to positive agronomic  efficiency 
of magnesium fertilizers . So, here, these data points where means  of plus minus 95 percent 
confidence  interval we can see and the number of  experimental observation were indicated  in 
this parentheses .  
For example , increase  the fruit , there are 5 2 observation , in case of grasses there are 28  
observations and small letters indicated , so, this small letter generally  indicated  the 
significant difference  between different crops . So,  that shows  the agronomic,  how this 
agronomic  efficiency of magnesium fertilizer  varies between different crops  and some of 
them are statistically  significant also .  (Refer Slide Time: 24:20 ) 
 
So, if you see , also the relationship  betw een secondary nutrient and crop, this graph is 
showing the , in x axis  it is showing magne sium applied in  kg per hectare and magnesium 
uptake also  in kg per hectare . So, we can see a straight -line relationship , positive  relationship 
between magnesium uptake  with the magnesium application .  
However , we can see here , the calcium applied , when  we are applying the calcium the  
potassium uptake is decreasing . So, this shows the relationship between  calcium applied and 
potassium uptake by  groundnut . So, these  shows different types of specifically , this second  
plot shows the relationship between two  different  nutrients  in any groundnut  crop.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:23)  
 Also , the nutrient and soil  pH, you can  see here , the plant availability of  miner al nutrient 
depends on the soil  pH. We have already discussed that . But you  can see here , the potassium 
availability  as well as calcium and magnesium  availability increases with increasing  the pH 
from 4 to 8. So,  that shows  that in the low  pH condition , these three minerals may not  be 
sufficiently present  for crop  uptake .  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:55 ) 
 
So, this makes the end of this  lecture as well as this week 4 for secondary nutrients . So,  we 
have discussed  different types of secondary  nutrients , three different nutrients and  also we 
have seen  their sources , their role , their cycle  as well as  their interaction and also their 
fertilizer sources and their application  guidelines .  
So, I hope that you have  gathered some  good knowledge of  secondary nutrients  for plant  
nutrition . And let us meet in our next  week of lectures where we will discuss  the 
micronutrients  and their importance for plant growth . Thank you . 