Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 5  
Lecture 23 
Soil micronutrients and their role in plant nutrition  (Contd.)  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:29)  
 
Welcome friends to this lec ture number 23 of Nptel  online certific ation course of soil fertility 
and fertili zers a nd in this week we are talking about this week 5, and in this week we are 
talking about micronutrients and their role in plant nutrition.  
So, in our previous lectures, we have discussed about basics of micronutrients and there are 
different factors which can affect the micronutrient availability in the soil, we have also 
discussed the micronutrients cycle, we have also discussed the some of the  deficiency 
symptoms and what are the critical ranges of different micronutrients within the plant we 
have also discussed.  
Now, in this lecture we are going to discuss the deficiency symptoms of the micronutrients in 
the plant also we can also we will dis cuss the boron fertilisation in in soil and what are the 
consideration of boron fertilizers  application in soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 1:25)  
 
So, these are the concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture. First of all, we are 
going to talk about th e zinc deficiency in plant then we are going to talk about boron 
deficiency in plants. And then, we are going to talk about the susceptible and tolerant plants 
against micronutrient deficiencies. And then we are going to talk about micronutrient 
deficiency  status in India and then behaviour of boron in soil. So, these are the major 
concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:57) 
 
Secondly, these are the keywords which are going to discuss in this lecture deficiency 
symptoms chlorosis , necrosis, borax and micronutrient fertilizers .  (Refer Slide Time: 2:06) 
 
Now, how to identify the deficiency in the plant ? So, there are some visual deficiency 
symptoms in different plant parts. So, just like in case of primary nutrients and s econdary 
nutrients micronutrient deficiency are also can be seen visuall y let us discuss some of them. 
So, first is iron. In case of i ron we can see interve inal yellowing and chlorosis of emerging 
leafs, entire plant becomes cholorotic and also we can see akoichi disease in ri ce.  
So, these are the some of the iron visual deficiency symptoms. In case of manganese, we can 
see pale gr ayish green interveinal chlorosis spreads from the tip to the lip base and also we 
can see grey speaks in oats, and then pahala  bight of sugarcane, Marsh spot in  pea and also 
speckled yellow of sugar beet.  
So, we can see this is an example of iron deficiency in rice. So, this is a iron deficiency 
symptom in rice. This is the a koichi disease in rice, and you can see grey specks in oats and 
Marsh spot spot in p ea. So, these are the deficiency symptoms of these micronutrients, 
specifically iron and manganese.  (Refer Slide Time: 3:26) 
 
Now, if we talk about the zinc deficiency, lea f base of younger leaves become chlorotic 
brown and b lotches and streaks or can be can be seen on lower leaves. And then we can see 
Khaira disease of rice it is a very important disease K haira disease of rice, due to zinc 
deficiency, then white bud in maize and sorghum and their little leaf in brinjal , cotto n and 
mango and also ferm leaf o f potato.  
So, these are the some of the Zinc deficiency symptoms . In case of copper, we can see leaves 
develop chlorotic and streaks on either side of the midrib and then dark brown necrotic 
lesions on leaf tips  and bluish green and chlorotic patches near the leaf tip,  dieback s in, 
dieback  in citrus , steam melanosis in wheat,  excess  gumming and also exe nthema  in citrus .  
So, these are some of the symptoms of nutrient deficiency in in the soil. So, we can see this is 
example of K haira disease in rice due to zinc deficiency, then little leaf in brinjal . You can 
see this is also due to zinc deficiency. Here you can see copper deficiency symptoms and also 
dieback in Cyprus due to copper deficiency. So, these are the deficiency sy mptoms of these 2 
major micronutrients.  (Refer Slide Time:  5:07) 
 
So, if we talk about the nickel deficiency  symptoms and boron deficiency symptoms. So 
sorry now , if we talk about the nickel deficiency symptoms and boron deficiency symptoms, 
in case of nickel lea f chlorosis and leaf necrosis in cowpea can be seen.  
In case of boron, we can see white and roll ed leaf tips of younger leaves the n death  of 
growing points. However, new tillers continue to emerge during severe deficiency .  
Internal cork of appl e and then brown heart and root crops , heart rot of sugarbeet, hollow 
stem of cauliflower, fruit cracking, hard fruits all these are symptoms of boron deficiency. So, 
here as you can see, this is a leaf chlorosis in cowpe a, which is due to that nickel defi ciency.  
And also in case of cauliflower you can see this a hallow stem due to , this is due to boron 
deficiency. This is heart rot of sugar beet burn due to boron deficiency and fruit cracking of 
pomegranate, which is also the the boron deficiency due to t he boron deficiency. So, these are 
the nickel and boron deficiency symptoms.  (Refer Slide Time: 6:16)  
 
Now, in case of chlorine, we can see wilting, twisting and curling of the leaves you can see 
chlorine deficiency symptoms here leafs are getting curle d and then molybdenum in plants 
with reticulate venation deficiency first occurs as chlorotic modelling between the veins on 
old or middle leaves all over the surface.  
And also we can see whiptail of cauliflower here you can see whip tail of cauliflower t hen 
chlorotic mottling of chloric of quality of  cauliflower  and then scaled in beans we can also 
see and also cupping in cauliflower these are some of the symptoms and also here you can 
see molybdenum deficiency in sunflower . So, this is a sunflower and in  Melon . So, these are 
some of the deficiency symptoms of chlorine and molybdenum.  (Refer Slide Time: 7:19)  
 
  
 
  
 
  
So, this is also showing the zinc deficiency in rice and then iron deficiency you can see 
chlorotic leaves then boron deficiency there is a hollow stem in cauliflower and you can see 
these a boron deficiency in weight and disease , weight with optimum boron concentration. 
This is a vertical splitting in carrier root due to boron deficiency .  
This is ground n ut in case of ground nut we can see hollow heart and eventual discoloration 
due to boron deficiency. And you can here also see boron deficiency in tomato and you can 
clearly see the difference there in 1field application of NPK 10 , 26, 26 with borax and 
without borax. So, you can cl early see the difference in the in the crop growth. T his is 
molybdenum deficiency symptoms.  
(Refer Slide Time: 8:28 ) 
 So, now, we have seen that deficiency symptoms of the plant due to different micronutrients 
let us discuss some of the susceptible or to lerant plants to micronutrients and specific 
condition conducive to micronutrient deficiencies.  
So, if we see the , as for zinc, the plant most commonly deficients are very much sensitive 
crops or rice, onion and soybean and plants which was rarely deficie ncy symptoms are 
safflower peas and crucifers , crucifers means mainly the cauliflower and then soil condition 
associated with the deficiency or calca reous and acidic sandy soils.  
So, in case of calca reous an acidic sandy soil you can see these micronutrie nt is zinc is 
deficient. Boron we can see the plan most commonly deficient or cauliflower, rapeseed and 
wheat and plants which was rarely deficiency symptoms are onion  and potato and then soil 
conditions which are generally associated with deficiency or lo w organic matter and acidic 
sandy soil.  
In case of molybdenum, we can see the deficiency symptoms mostly in cabbage and legumes. 
However, most grasses do not show any mild molybdenum deficiency , soil conditions which 
are associated with the deficiencies are acidic sandy soil, high amorphous iron , aluminium 
contents. So, these are some of the conditions where you can expect some molybdenum 
deficiency . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:03)  
 
Now, if you see the status of micronutrient deficiency in India, this shows thi s graph, this 
map shows the level of zinc deficiency and this map shows the level of iron deficiency. So, you can see these green patches are showing less than 10  percent  of zinc deficiency and these 
red patches are showing high amount of zinc deficiency a nd these brown and these orange 
patches are showing also more than 40 to less than 50  percent of levels of zinc deficiency.  
So, you can see in Tamil Nadu  and also some parts of Madhya Pradesh and also some parts 
of Rajasthan can show these high zinc defic iency symptoms. However, in case of iron 
deficiency you can see in Rajasthan and Gujarat, these we can see more than 25  percent  of 
iron deficiency and also some patches in Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, we 
can see these nutrient deficiency o f iron in soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:27 ) 
 
 So, this map shows the level of manganese deficiency manganese deficiency can be mainly 
found in Rajasthan area and in some areas of Punjab, where we can see more than 25% of 
manganese deficiency in case of cop per deficiency we can also see some copper deficiency in 
Rajasthan area.  
So, if we combine both zinc and boron deficiency that is among all the percentage of sample 
sites from all over the India we can have an idea about where we can see these 2 
macronutr ient deficiencies. So, these 2 micronutrient deficiency can be seen in in in some 
parts of in some parts of Bihar and Jharkhand a nd also we can see these is some parts of 
Orissa , some parts of Tamil Nadu , Karnataka and also some parts of Gujarat and Goa.  
So, these are some of the areas and some parts are up also, we can see the severe that is more 
than 20  percent  of zinc plus iron deficiencies. So, these 2 are made  major, these 2 
micronutrients produce the major deficiency of micronutrients in Indian condi tion.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:02)  
 
So, if you see the status of micronutrient deficiency in India, it will be quite clear that zinc 
accounts were 43 percent followed by boron, then which shows , which accounts for 18.3  
percent  followed by iron that is 12.1  percent  followed by manganese which is which accounts 
for 5.5  percent  and followed by copper which is 5.4  percent . So, we can clearly see that zinc 
and boron are the 2 major micronutrients of concern because they show huge amount of 
deficiency in Indian so il condition.  So, if we see the, the micronutrients and the highest and lowest deficiency of available 
micronutrients and hot water soluble boron in soils of different states we can see in case of 
zinc, the highest deficiency symptoms we can see in Tamil Nadu  and lowest in Himachal 
Pradesh.  
In case of Ir on, the maximum deficiency you can see in Gujarat and lower low deficiency low 
is deficiency symptoms you can see Bihar and West Bengal  in case of copper we can s ee 
highest deficiency in Tamil Nadu  and lowest deficiency in a Himachal Pradesh , Madhya 
Pradesh and Maharashtra in case of manganese we can see highest deficiency in Himachal 
Pradesh and lowest deficiency in Assam and Jharkhand.  
In case of boron we can see highest deficiency in Jharkhand. However,  the lowest deficiency 
we can see in Madhya Pradesh. So, these are showing the highest and lowest availability of 
the micronutrients in soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:35)  
 
Now, if you see the combination of 2 or 3 micro deficiency status in the soil we can see that 2 
micronutrients like zinc plus iron , zinc plus copper , zinc plus manganese and zinc plus boron . 
This table shows the state wise  deficiency status for Indian condition for all these  different 
combinations and when there are the 3 micronutrients ar e combined, these are the distribution 
of the deficiencies across all the states.  
So, you can see zinc plus iron shows, zinc plus boron shows the maximum deficiency 
symptoms followed by zinc plus iron and the zinc plus copper and zinc plus manganese. So, when we consider 2 micronutrients combination, zinc plus boron accounts for the major 
micronutrient deficiency in the plants . In case of deficiency status of chain you can see  zinc, 
iron, manganese shows the highest deficiency followed by zinc , iron and bo ron and zinc, 
copper and manganese. So, these are the status of micronutrient deficiency in different parts 
of India.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:56)  
 
So, if we talk about boron, so, what are the sources of boron in the soil. So, these are the 
major sources of  boron in soil, Borax, Karnite , colemanite and then tu ormaline and ulexite.  
So, these are the major sources of boron. So, these are basically Borates and Borosilicates . 
These are the major sources of boron in soil, these are the minerals.  (Refer Slide Ti me: 16:28)  
 
So, if we consider boron in soil, total boron concentration in soil depends on parent material 
and the degree of weathering with natural background concentration usually, which ranges 
from 2 to 100 ppm. Now, boron is never found as a single el ement and is usually combined 
with oxygen as Borates . And boron may also be tightly bound in silicate minerals to produce 
very insoluble minerals such as clay minerals or tourmalines . And remember that adsorption 
on oxides and association with organic matt er can be seen in case of boron in soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:11)  
 
Now, soluble boron in the soil exist as neutral species, which is boric acid in most of the soil 
as well as this ionic form in high pH soil. Now, the adsorption of boron in soil is weak though generally higher in pH soil, in high pH soil, when the pH is greater than 8, the low retention 
makes boron vulnerable to leaching and excess rainfall can result in loss of applied boron 
from the top of the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:47)  
 
So, if w e see the boron content in surface soil of course, the total boron content can vary from 
2.8 to 630 PPM however, the availability of the boron is very less varying from trays to only 
25 ppm. So, that is why boron management is very critical.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:10)  
 So, boron management is difficult because deficiency and toxicity range of boron is very 
narrow. So, very small quantities required which is varying  from 0.5 to 1 kg of boron per 
hectare , to correct any boron deficiency symptom.  
(Refer Slid e Time: 18:29)  
 
Now, why boron deficiency is a widespread problem in India. There are several reasons first 
of all, intensive cropping is one of the major reason of boron deficiency and limited use of 
organic manures like F YM compost is another reason for  Boron deficiency. And finally, use 
of high analysis  fertilizers such as DAP is another cause of boron deficiency.  
So, these boron deficiency symptoms because when we apply these high analysis fertili zer, 
which does not contain any particular micronutrien t that can vigorously grow the crop help in 
vigorous growth of the crop, but the problem is that enhances the micronutrient demand or in 
other words, micronutrient deficiency.  (Refer Slide Time: 19:20)  
 
Now, boron deficiency can be aggravated by these i ron aluminium oxides, because they helps 
in adsorption of boron and also light texture, acidic soil and heavy rainfall can also help you 
know can increase the leaching of the boron from the topsoil and ultimately creating the 
boron deficiency.  
(Refer Slid e Time: 19:45)  
 
So, guys, this makes the end of our discussion of this deficiency symptoms of different 
micronutrients in the plant and we have discussed the Visual deficits, symptoms of different 
elements within the plant  body. And also we have  discussed  the boron management in the 
soil, why boron is deficient and then what are  the sources of boron, and we have also discussed the nutrient deficiency status in India, where we can see that the zinc and boron 
accounts for the major micronutrient deficiency i n India.  
And we also have identified those areas within India which can show high nutrient 
deficiencies specifically in terms of micronutrients, those patches which shows the 
micronutrient deficiency for individual micronutrients.  
So, we have discussed t his thing. We  will continue to discuss all these aspects in our coming 
lecture, and we  will discuss more about these in our coming lecture. Till now, thank you very 
much and le t us meet in our next lecture.  