Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 02  
Importance of Soil Nutrient Management  and Basics Soil -Plant Relationship (Contd.)  
Welcome friends to this NPTEL  online certification course of S oil Fertility and F ertilizers. 
And we are at week 1, the topic of week 1  is the I mportance of Soil Nutrient Management 
and Basic Soil Plant to R elationship. And today we are going to start our lecture 2  and in the 
first lecture we have discussed about the basic of soil fertility and then we have discussed 
about what is l aw of  minimum, Liebig's law of minimum, we have also discussed the law of 
diminishing return and also,  we have seen, we have briefly started  the law of maximum.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:58)  
 
So, we  will start from there and these are our the concepts which are going to cover in this 
lecture, we are going to cover the essential P lant Nutrients, then C lassification of P lant 
Nutrients, their N utrient Mobility Concept, then B alanced Nutrition and finally, we are going 
to see some N utrient Deficiency symptoms.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:14)  
 
These are some of the keywords P lant Nutrient Concentration, Macro-Nutrients , Micro-
Nutrients, Hidden Hunger and  also Interveinal  chlorosis these are some of the keywords for 
this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:25)  
 
So, let us start from the L aw of M aximum. So, you if you remember we have started 
discussing about the law of maximum it says that, it can… the effect  of a given input is 
progressively magnified as other limiting factors are corrected. And of course, the final result 
is greater than the sum of the effect of the individual inputs because of the way in which they interact and the interaction multiplies th e effect of each other.  So, individual growth factor will not be greater than the aggregate values of the growth 
factors , we will see some examples .  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:01)  
 
One example is given here suppose, an application of potassium resulted in an orange yield of 
81 pound per tree. When applied simultaneously with phosphorus  the increase attributable to  
potassium  was 115 pound per tree . And when applied with both phosphorus and nitrogen, the 
increase attributable to K was 202 pound per tree.  
So, t he same amount of potassium was applied in each of these cases and the potassium was 
almost two and half times as valuable when applied with nitrogen phosphorus as when applied alone. So, that shows there is some synergistic effects. So, this is called…  this is 
where you can see here we are applying the similar amount of potassium in each time however, due to the presence of phosphorus and simultaneous application of phosphorus and 
nitrogen, we are getting higher yield.   (Refer Slide Time: 03:05)  
 
Another  example you can see phosphorus increase the yield of the cabbage by 5.7 tonnes per 
acre and potassium increase it by 7 tonnes per acre individually. So, both together increase it 
by 16.5 tonnes per acre. So, this is  the result is greater than the sum of t he parts which is an 
important characteristics of the law of maximum.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:30)  
 
Now, let us see another important term that is essentiality  criteria. Now, criteria of 
essentiality of mineral elements are this term of essential element  was proposed by t wo 
scientists  Arnon and Stout  in the year 1939. And to become essential plant nutrients , a element to be termed as an essential plant nutrient then  element has to fulfil these three 
criteria. All these three criteria .  
First of all,  a plant must be unable to complete its lifecycle without that element and 
secondly, the function of the element cannot be substituted by another element. And third,  it 
is required for a specific metabolic function. So, when one element will fulfil  all these three 
important criteria, then only they will be considered as an essential mineral nutrient.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:32)  
 
Now, what are the essential mineral nutrients ? We can classify them into different categories 
like Primary (macro ) nutrients, Secondary (macro) nutrients , Micronutrients, so these primary 
nutrients and secondary nutrients are grouped together in the macronutrients and of course, 
there are some micronutrients .  
Remember that, these terms at  given based on their relative quantity required by the plant not 
based on the ir importance , irrespective of their quantity, they are all equally important. If one 
of them is missing, then that will impact the plant growth. So, the balance of both macro -
nutrients and micro- nutrients is key and it needs both of them are needed to help the crop 
complete this lifecycle. So, let us see some of the macro -nutrients .  (Refer Slide Time: 05:24)  
 
So, carbon, hydrogen , oxygen, they make up 95 percent  of the dry matter of the plant parts 
and carbon dioxide from air is converted in the plants to sugars, starches, proteins, enzymes 
and multitude of other organic compounds and oxygen is a component of most organic 
compounds.  
So, must be present for plant roots to function and hydrogen and oxygen from water you know, gener ally, plant grow  hydrogen and oxygen from water, which makes up most of the 
weight of the living parts. And these are the constituents of most organic compounds and is involved in many of the chemical reaction of the plant. So, that is why these carbon,  
hydrogen and oxygen are also known as the structural elements for the plant.  (Refer Slide Time: 06:23)  
 
So, let us see the C lassification of Plant Nutrients  based on the quantity required , macro -
nutrient , macro -nutrient must be present in plant tissue in concentration more than one 
milligram per gram of dry weight,  and in these macro -nutrients there are two categories one a 
primary nutrient  and the secondary nutrients.  
So, the primary nutrients are also among the macronutrients. So, th ese nitrogen, phosphorus 
potassium are known as primary nutrients required in a proper ratio for a successful crop. So, 
and secondary nutrients are next to the primary nutrients they are  calcium, sulphur , and 
calcium magnesium is also there. So, please include magnesium.  
So, calcium, magnesium and sulphur , they are also known as the secondary nutrients and 
micro -nutrients or trace elements are present in the plant tissue in concentration of less than 1  
ppm. So, these micro -nutrients are zinc, copper, iron, manganese, boron .  (Refer Slide Time: 07:35)  
 
And there are some ultra -micronutrients . So, these are also coming under the micronutrients. 
So, you can see here. So, these nutrients are present in plant tissue in concentration of less 
than 1 ppb. So, they are known as the ultra -micronutrients  like molybdenum, chlorine and 
cobalt, there are some beneficial plant nutrients also.  
So, they are not required by all plants, but can promote plant growth and may be essential for 
several plant species like sodium , vanadium  and silico n. There is a term called Q uasi 
essential elements. So, silicon is considered as a quasi -essential  element for plants, because it 
has not been determined essential for on plants, but maybe beneficial for many. So, that is why it is known as a quasi -essenti al element.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:26)  
 
So, this table shows the different nutrients as their symbol they are ionic forms, which are 
available to the forms available to the plant. So, you can see that carbon hydrogen their 
symbol and generally…  and carbon , hydrogen,  oxygen they are generally received by the 
plants from air and water and among the primary nutrients nitrogen is there.  
So, nitrogen is available to the plant in the form of nitrate and ammonium , phosphorus is 
available form primary orthophosphate and secondary orthophosphate , potassium is in K  plus 
form available to the plants , secondary micronutrient calcium Ca2  plus magnesium , 
magnesium 2 plus ion,  sulphur  sulphate  ion and among the micro- nutrients boron is present … 
boron will be available to  the plants in the form of boric acid and borate.  
And copper will be available as Cupreous Cu2 plus, chlorine will be available as chloride ion , 
iron will be available as Fe 2 plus or ferrous , manganese will be available as manganous  Mn2  
plus, molybdenum w ill be available as molybdate , nickel will be available as Ni2  plus and 
zinc will be available as Zn2 plus ion.  
Others sodium will be available as sodium ion sodium plus , silicon will be available as 
silicate ion and cobalt will be available as cobalt ion. So, this is the ionic forms which are available to the plants , remember plants cannot take all the forms of a nutrient, there are 
certain forms which are only can … only will be available to the plants for their growth.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:11)  
 
Now, remember that nitrogen is frequently the most limiting nutrient for plant growth. So, 
use of nitrogen is usually higher than that of total use of other macro- nutrients together. So, 
you will see that most often people are saying about nitrogenous fertilize r like urea and other 
nitrogenous fertilizer, because they have to, and because these nitrogenous fertilizer have to 
apply in higher quantities than any other fertilizers.  
Now, it is a main natural sources of plant available nitrogen, organic matter, because when 
organic matter degrades, that gives the … that supplies the nitrogen for the plants and also 
nitrogen fixation from air by microorganisms living in symbiotic relationship with legume 
roots are also an important source of plant available nitrogen we  are going to discuss this in 
our in our upcoming weeks in details.  
Phosphorus is taken up by the plants as phosphate ions and this dissolution of soluble phosphates in the soil and mineralization of organic matter are the factors which influence 
with the  phosphate ion availability in the soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:30)  
 
Now, if you see the importance of nitrogen for the plants , remember that in general green 
leafy non-legume  vegetables need more nitrogen than other types of the plants and imbalance 
of nutrients available to the plants may be the reason for increase incidence of pests and 
excessive nitrogen fertilizer makes plan ts more susceptible to attacks by disease and insects.  
Just like I have mentioned that we should not apply to any nutrient in l ess quantity or in toxic 
quantity also, so that they can be other real effects like disease and insects. So, same time, 
you know, if there is a nitrogen toxicity, we can see, there are some disease  and pests, 
nitrogen is needed for leaf and stem growth and it gives a dark green colour  to the plants.  
The level of nitrogen added to the soil is important since it affects the plants access to the 
other nutrients such as phosphorus and potassium. So, that is why nitrogen is considered as 
one of the most importa nt nutrient for the plant growth. Nitrogen is also important from the 
point of view of human nutrition as it increases the protein content of some foods and feed crops. So, the major source of protein you know plant protein, you know is nitrogen, and witho ut nitrogen, the plant growth will be stunted severely.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:00)  
 
So, if you see the importance of phosphorus and potassium for the plants , you can see that 
flowering and fruiting vegetables need more phosphorus than other types of the plants and 
root vegetables need more potassium than other types of the plants. Now , phosphorus helps 
makes plants more drought resistant and hardy, it speeds up maturity,  helps seeds and fruit 
formation and stimulates root growth. It also helps vegetable gr ow and form nodules.  
Whereas potas sium  increases resistance to plant to disease,  creates winter hardiness and 
drought resistance and produces stiff stalks and stems to reduce water logging. It also 
increases grain plumpness as well as growth of fruit and root vegetables.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:50)  
 So, if we see these curve that is in response to fertilizer applied, so in the x axis, we are 
applying the fertilizer in the y axis we are getting the crop yield. So, you can see up to this point A the increase  in yield is linear  to the addition of the fertilizer in this case this is urine, 
which is a source rich source of nitrogen. However, beyond these rate B  we can see 
additional fertilizer application can become toxic to the plant.  
So, we have to be very ve ry careful while adding the fertilizer we cannot indiscriminately add 
fertilizers without considering the effect , their effect on the crop yield of course, if we go 
beyond a certain rate that will create the fertilizer toxicity.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:38)  
 
So, here in this scattergram  says here you can see that plus signs are showing the crops grown  
under abiotic stress and negative signs are showing crop grown without abiotic stress . And in 
the x axis, we are seeing beneficial elements concentration in th e shoots and the y axis we are 
getting the relative yield.  
So, here this scatter diagram show ing the relationship between the essential plant nutrients 
and beneficial elements on crop yield indicating two categories on the positive category and negative categories of the  you know,  showing the discriminating variable abiotic stress.  
So, the slopes of the growth functions of essential macro and micro- nutrients increases 
steeply with the decreasing critical elemental concentration in the plant tissue. So, of  course, 
as we go from this higher concentration to lower concentration, the steepness of the growth function will increase as you can see here, as we are growing from this sufficiency to 
deficiency I would say then you can see the steepness of the growth will increase.  
So, that means, the growth of the plant is vigorous in the initial stages when we apply the fertilizer and after a certain amount … it reaches a plateau , the growth reaches a plateau and 
after a critical limit, you know a toxicity limit ther e will be toxicity limit after that, there will 
be the further yield reduction.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:05)  
 
So, what are the mobilities of nutrients within the plants ? So, nitrogen, phosphorus potassium 
are always plant mobile nutrients moves from older l eaves to the younger tissues. So, mobile 
nutrient deficiencies are noticeable on older tissues. So, plant immobile or slowly mobile 
element deficiencies are noticeable first on younger tissues. So, based on whether your 
element is mobile or immobile, their  appearance of their deficiencies would appear at 
different places.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:44)  
 
So, here this table shows, what are the mobile , variably mobile , immobile and variably 
mobile nutrients. So, here you can see the mobile nitrogen phosphorus , potassium, 
manganese,  iron. Variably mobile copper, zinc , sulfur , molybdenum . Whereas immeubles are 
calcium, boron and manganese.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:06)  
  
Now, what is hidden hunger ? Hidden hunger refers to a situation in which a crop needs more 
of a given nutrient. So, now we can see based on the mobility of the nutrients within the 
plants we can classify them into mobile , variably mobile and immobile nutrients. Among the 
mobile nutrients you can see nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, magnesium and iron are 
mobile elements , variably mobile elements are copper, zinc, sulfur, molybdenum, and 
immobile elements are calcium, boron and manganese.  
Now, let us see what is hidden hunger ? Hidden hunger is a situation in which crop needs 
more of a given nutrient,  yet has shown  no deficiency symptoms. So, here you can see as we 
are increasing the fertilizer and the crop is showing the increasing the yield this is the top 
yield. But here there are some symptoms  up to this point.  
But after these there is no symptoms , but it still requires fertilizer elements or it is require s 
the elements for their growth to reach the top yield. So, this is known as the hidden hunger. 
So, that means, when the yield, you know when the crop needs more and more nutrient, but it does not show any deficiency symptoms that is known as the hidden hunger . So, the nutrient 
content is above the deficiency symptoms.  
So, here you can see the nutrient content in this hidden hunger is above the deficiency symptoms but still considerably needed for  optimum crop production. So, for optimum crop 
production, we still need to apply more fertilizers. So, with most nutrients on most crops, significant responses can be obtained even though no recognizable symptoms have appeared. 
So, this is known as hidden hunger.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:58)  
 
So, here you can see that what are the different symptoms of the nutrient deficiency,  so this is 
the normal leaf. In case of severe nitrogen deficiency,  you will see that white and yellowing 
of the tiny leaves in case of you know, in case of calcium deficiency or might be potassium , 
magnesium overdose, you will see twisted  pale new growth and this is the iron deficiency.  
Here you can see there is a yellowing  of the interplant, and here this is the magnesium 
deficiency  shows the dark green veins you know, and light a  leaf tissues. In case of potassium 
deficiency we will see the pinholes from form in leave that enlarge with the yellowing  age 
and leaf is otherwise normal looking.  
And here you can see early signs of nitrogen deficiency that is older leaves, become yellow 
and are reabsorbed from tip to stain and here is a phosphate deficiency where you add the 
older leaves are yellow and parts of the leaves is reabsorbed leading to date patches, the leaf falls off rather qu ickly and looks similar to the early nitrogen deficiency. So, here you can see 
that due to the deficiency of different types of nutrients, what type of nutrients or deficiency expression in the plant you can expect. So, these are the new leaves and these are the older 
leaves.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:29)  
 
Now, there are some important N utrient Deficienc y Terminologies you should know , first of 
all Burning which is the severe localized yellowing or scorched  appearance.  Chlorosis means 
the general yellowing of  the plant tissue lack of chlorophyll . Generalized means symptoms 
not limited to one area of the plant but rather spread over the entire plant . Immobile nutrient 
those nutrients which are not able to move from one part of the plan to another . Interveinal 
Chlorosis  is basically yellowing in between l eaf veins, yet veins remain g reen.   
Localized if you know symptoms are symptoms limited to one leaf or one section of the leaf 
or plant, mobile nutrient able to be moved from one plant part to another , Mottling  is spotted 
irregular , inconsistent pattern . Necrosis is data of plant tissue,  tissue browns  and dies.  And 
finally, stunting is the stunting is the decrease growth at shorter height of the affected plants.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:41)  
 
So, these are the some  of the deficiency terminologies and you can see the most common 
deficiencies are of those nitrogen, potassium and phosphorus, you can see these is an healthy 
leaf and this is the phosphate deficiencies leaf  you can see clearly reddish purple margins, 
especially on younger leaves and then potassium deficient you can see firing that is d rying off 
along tips and margins of older leaves .  
And nitrogen deficiencies , deficiency you can see yellowing that stands at the tip and moves 
along the centre of the older leaves. So, these are nitrogen deficient. So, you can see this is 
how these leaves will look like when different nutrients are deficient.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:21)  
 And now we can see some example of Interveinal Chlorosis  due to iron deficiency. And here  
you can see nitrogen deficiency in barley where top leaves are nitrogen deficient bottom 
leaves is normal. So, this is nitrogen deficiency,  however this bottom leaf is normal. And here 
you can see phosphorus deficiency and alfalfa left and this is the nor mal alfalfa.  
So, phosphorus  deficient leave is dark green and stunted. And you can see here this is the 
phosphorus deficiency in corn leaves. So,  leaves that purplish and tips  are brown and 
necrotic. So, these are some of the symptoms of different nutrient deficiency in the plant.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:04)  
 
And also, we can see here, this is the alfalfa with a boron deficiency and chlorosis of upper 
leaves and rosetting of leaves near the base. So, you can see here rosetting  of leaves near the 
base and chlorosis of the upper leaves. Here you can see the copper deficiency in wheat. So, 
this is severely affected in you know, these are the severely affected, these are moderately affected and these are unaffected.  
So, deficiency which was melanosis with poor  grain formation , production and feel you can 
clearly see here and so, this is also zinc deficiency displaying striped Interveinal Chlorosis . 
So, guys, I hope that now, we have understood, understood that the plan can show different 
types of deficiency sym ptoms, when certain elements are absent.  
And these elements based on their sufficiency  or deficiency, they can show some symptoms 
and of course, we have to be very, very careful about the toxicity of these nutrients, so that 
we can ensure a balanced nutri ent supply to the plants to get the optimum yield.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:22)  
 
Now, let us see what is the classification of plant nutrients based on the quantity of the 
nutrient required. Now, there are two major categories one is macro -nutrient and other is 
micro -nutrient. Among macro- nutrients , macro -nutrients are of two types one is primary 
nutrient and other is secondary nutrients. Now , macro -nutrients are those nutrients which 
must be present in plant tissue in concentration more than more than 1  milligram per gram of 
dry weight.  
Now,  micro -nutrient are classified into two major categories one is primary nutrient and other 
is secondary nutrient. What are the primary nutrients ? Primary nutrients are nitrogen, 
phosphorus and potassium. These are requi red as the primary , these are known as primary 
nutrients because they are required  in higher quantity then other nutrients.  
Now, there another category is secondary nutrients. So, secondary nutrients are  those primary 
nutrients which are required in compa ratively lesser quantity then the primary nutrients , what 
are the secondary nutrients the secondary nutrients are calcium, magnesium and sulfur. Now, so, these are primary these are macronutrients, another group of broad categories there that is 
called mic ro-nutrients or trace nutrients.  
Now, these are generally present in plant issuing concentration of less than 1  ppm or 
milligram per kg and they are also known as micronutrients. So, examples are zinc, copper, 
iron, manganese boron.  (Refer Slide Time: 2 6:10)  
 
Now, remember that there are two more micro -nutrients like molybdenum and chlorine, but 
they are also required in very less quantity that less than one parts per billion. So, they are 
also known as Ultra -micro -nutrients. Remember this molybdenum  and chlorine  comes under 
the broad category of micro- nutrients, but they are also sometimes termed as Ultra -micro -
nutrients because they are required  in less than 1  ppb in quantity.  
So, these are the essential plant nutrients, macronutrients and micronutrie nts are essential 
primary nutrients. Now, n ext another term is there that is called beneficial plant nutrients. 
Now, they are not required by all plants, but can promote plant growth and may be essential 
for several plant species. For example, sodium vanadium and silicon they are known as 
beneficial plant nutrients another terminology is  there is called the quasi essential element.  
So, silicon is an example of quasi essential element , because it is considered as a because it is 
not an essential for all the  plants, but it is beneficial for many plants. So, that is why it is 
called the quasi essential element. Now, you have understood what is the broad classification of nutrients  plant nutrients based on their essentiality and based on their quantity requirem ent. 
So, I hope that you have learned something new in this lecture. Let us meet in our next lecture to discuss some other important terms of soil and plant nutrient management. Thank you. 