Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Week 5  
Lecture 25  
Soil Micronutrients and Their Role in Plant Nutrition (Contd.)  
Welcome friends to this l ast lecture of week 5, lecture number 25 of this NPTEL  online 
certification course of soil fertility and fertilizers . And in this week 5 we are talking about 
soil macronutrients and their role in plant nutrition. In our first four lectures, we have 
discuss ed about basics of micronutrients, micronutrients cycle, their sufficiency and 
deficiency, their critical ranges, their toxicity  symptoms, their deficiency symptoms in 
detail s. And in this last lecture, that is lecture number 25. We are going to discuss th ese 
following concepts.  
(Refer Slide Time:  00:57)  
 
These are first of all we are going to discuss the fertilizer  sources of iron and then important 
soil test methods for micronutrients and then critical limits of micronutrients in soils and then 
recommen dation for major deficient micronutrients in India and also effects of different zinc 
coated formulations. So, these are some of the concepts which we are going to discuss .  (Refer Slide Time:  01:25)  
 
These are the keywords for this lecture , iron fertili zer, soil test methods , microbial 
biofertilizers , foliar application and integrated nutrient management.  
(Refer Slide Time:  01:36)  
 
So, let us see what are the fertilizer  sources of iron. Now, we must remember that success 
with iron fertilization  is diff icult because there is a difficulty in correcting iron deficiency 
with soil applied fertilizer  because when we apply this iron, iron quickly converts to 
unavailable form certain iron chelate carriers like E DDHA have been effective but not 
economical and may require multiple applications .  
And foliar application of iron proves to be the most promising approach for correcting the 
iron deficiency in the crop. So, when we apply this , why iron converts to unavailable form because the available form is Fe 2 plus w hen you apply this Fe2 plus in the soil it get s 
oxidised to Fe 3 plus form and that becomes unavailable to the plant. So, this is how the iron's 
fertilization  through soil applied fertilizer  is difficult. So foliar application is an approach 
which can takes  care of the iron deficiency in the crop.  
(Refer Slide Time:  02:59)  
 
Now, what are the factors affecting the iron bio-availability? First of all , soil pH , is in high 
soil pH , you know that iron and manganese are mostly available in low soil pH. However, 
when there is a high soil piece that impact the iron availability and create s the iron 
deficiency .  
Soils with high salt contents also can create the bioavailability of iron and then cool , wet 
springs are also responsible for reducing the bio -availability of iron , poor soil drainage and 
aeration is another reason for iron deficiency and susceptible crops and varieties are also very 
much prone to iron deficiency and then high concentration of nitrate nitrogen inhibit 
conversion of Fe 3 plus to Fe2 plus increa sing severity of iron chlorosis .  
So, what happens generally we know that iron is available to the plant as Fe2 plus, now when 
there is a high concentration of nitrate nitrogen that inhibit the current version of this Fe3 plus 
to Fe2 plus thereby increasin g the iron deficiency and the symptoms can be seen as iron 
chlorosis.  (Refer Slide Time:  04:30)  
 
 
Now, common iron fertilizer  we can see that fertilizers  source like iron sulphate when there is 
an iron sulphate the iron content is 19 to 40  percent . Whe n there is an iron chelates , the iron  
content is 5 to 12  percent . And when we use other organics that contain 5 to 11  percent  of 
iron. So, these are the some common iron sources of fertilizers .  (Refer Slide Time:  05:05)  
 
Now , once we completed iron, let us move to , let us move to chlorine. Now, chlorine is 
available to the plant as chloride anion, which is a soluble , mobile anion and wheat, corn and 
sorghum are most susceptible of chlorine deficiency . The chlorine is very much important, 
because that gov erns the  different plant activities and deficiency are most likely in higher 
rainfall areas with no potassium application history.  
So, what happens when there is a high rainfall that can leach all the chlorine because this is a 
high mobile highly mobile anion. So, chloride ion can be easily leach ed away  from the soil 
with high amount of water and ultimately creating the chlorine deficiency . Addition of 
potassium chloride or Muriate of potash can increase the yield with high levels of available 
potassium .  
It can reduce this incidence of plant diseases and it can regulate the internal water 
relationship osmotic regulation, enzyme activation and other plant processes since, chlorine is 
very much important for water internal what relationship , osmotic regulati on. So, when we 
apply this Muriate of potash, that also takes care of these enzymatic activation, osmotic 
regulation and internal water relationship.  (Refer Slide Time:  06:45)  
 
Now, let us see some important soil test methods for micronutrient tests in the soil. So, if we 
see zinc as an element, so, we use different types of extractants for extracting these 
micronutrients from the soil. So, this zinc can be extracted by a mixture of 0.005 molar  of 
DTPA which is a chelating agent and 0.1 molar  TEA or triethanolamine and 0.01 molar  
calcium chloride at pH , buffered at pH 7.3.  
So, in this case, the soil solution ratio will be 1.2 and the shaking period will be 120 minutes. 
And here in this method the critical level of deficiency could be 0.5 to 1 ppm. We can  also 
extract this available zinc with 1 normal , 0.1 normal  HCL , 1 normal ammonium acetate at pH 
4.6 or 0.05 normal of HCl and for them, the soil solution ratio , shaking period and critical 
levels are also mentioned here.  
In case of copper, we can also us e the same DTPA T EA CaCl2 in fact, these DTPA T EA 
CaCl2  mixture can be used for both zinc copper, iron and also manganese and also nickel. So, 
all these 5 micronutrients can be extracted by this mixture of DTPA and then triethanolamine 
and calcium chloride . So, now, apart from this in case of copper we can also see these 0.1 
normal HCL can be used and also 1 normal  ammonium acetate can be used at pH 4.8.  
Iron 1 normal  ammonium acetate with pH 4.8 and we know, 1 normal  ammonium acetate at 
pH 7 can be used f or manganese and 3 normal this ammonium hydrogen phosphate and then 
phosphoric acid can be used for extracting the manganese . In case of boron , boron can be 
extracted from the soil through boiling water , boiling hot water. So, that is why it is called the 
hot water -soluble boron and we can also extract the boron with 0.01 molar  calcium chloride 
plus 0.05 molar  of mannitol and also boron can be extracted by 0.1 molar  salicylic acid .  For extracting the molybdenum , generally we use 0.175 molar  of ammonium oxa late at pH 
3.3. So, these are some of the extracted which can extract these micronutrients and after 
extracting these micronutrients, there are several methods which we use for measurement of 
this micronutrient concentration in this extracted solution. For  example , zinc, copper , iron 
and manganese we can measure with atomic absorption spectrophotometer or AAS . 
(Refer Slide Time:  10:08)  
 
Now, let us see what are the recommendations for major deficient micronutrients in India.  
(Refer Slide Time:  10:14)  
 
So, these are the strategies for alleviating micronutrient deficiencies. So, we can address the 
micro deficiency in food production by three method s. First of all, let us discuss what are the major causes of micronutrient deficiency . First of all, insufficie nt availability, second is 
reduced acquisition and third is limited soil content.  
So, insufficient availability of the micronutrients can be caused by unfavourable soil 
conditions, then excessive NP K application and agricultural management practices, faul ty 
agricultural management practices, these are the major reasons for insufficient availability of 
the micronutrients . These are the common cause of all micronutrient deficiencies. So, for 
these for rectifying these we can apply microbial biofertilizer whi ch can increase the 
availability by production of side rophores  and rhizosphere acidification and microbial redox 
cycling.  
So, microbial redox cycling can help to convert the unavailable forms to some available 
forms by changing their redox number or redox  potential. So, these are some of the ways . 
Now, did you see acquisition is another reason where fertilizers  and pesticides interfering 
with adsorbed absorption, then high nutrient demand or poor acquisition strategies of the 
crops are responsible.  
So, th ese two are the common cause of iron, zinc , manganese , and copper deficiency. And if 
the solution for these is increasing the acquisition, how to increase the acquisition by 
microbial fertilizer  because they helps in production of siderophores. Siderophore s acts like 
chelate. So, basically , they bind these metal ions and then make increase their availability 
then promote the plant root growth and they can form the symbiotic relationship with crop 
plants.  
So, these are some of the ways through  which micro nutrient  biofertilizers can be applied to 
increase the micronutrient acquisition. Limited soil content is another reason for 
micronutrient deficiency and low content in parent material and the input output imbalance 
and agricultural management practices can contribute to the zinc, boron, molybdenum and 
manganese deficiency.  
And this co-application  of this micronutrients microbial biofertilizers with fertilizer that can 
help because co-application  with conventional fertilizer  improves nutrient uptake and soil  
conditions while reducing the amount of fertilizer  required. So, this is how this application of 
bio fertilizers  can help in microbial can help in alleviating the micronutrient deficiencies. So, 
lessons in bio fertilizers  from natural ecosystems.  So, we can see that efficacy of biofertilizer will differ among microbial functional groups, 
depending on the micronutrient in question and co-application  of biofertilizers with organic 
matter could be effective in treating some micronutrient deficiencies. And bi oprocessing in 
natural ecosystem is a potential source of microbial taxa capable of mobilising micronutrients 
and withstanding harsh environment condition in the field.  
So, we can alleviate this micronutrient deficiency this way by applying these different  types 
of micronutrient or microbial bio fertilizers .  
(Refer Slide Time:  14:01)  
 
So, these are some of the ways to which we can correct this biofertilizer  microbial deficiency, 
first of all, applying the correct source of , sources of micronutrients, both  organic or 
inorganic fertilizers . Secondly, methods of application , it could be either soil foliar 
application or seed soaking. We can also use customised fertilizers , we can also use fortified 
fertilizer , we can also use synthetic micronutrient chelates or developing taller and varieties 
which can withstand these micronutrient deficiencies.   (Refer Slide Time:  14:40)  
 
Now, let us talk about the zinc , now regular application of in case of zinc the regular 
application of organic matter in terms of farmlan d manure or poultry manure or biogas slurry 
and compost, at the rate of 5 to 10 tonne per hectare helps mitigate the deficiencies of all 
micronutrient . So, generally that contains also zinc. So, if we want to reduce the zinc 
deficiency , we can apply the or ganic matter at the rate of 5 to 10 tonnes.  
So, in case of orchard s we can apply zinc sulphate in the basin mixing into the soil . Normal in 
case of normal soil we can apply 5.5 to 11 kg of zinc per hectare for every three seasons, 
preferably in the rabi season in soils with less than 0.3 to 0.5 ppm of zinc, which can occur in 
sandy and clay soils. In case of sodic soil, we can apply 22 kg of zinc per hectare initially 
followed by 5 to 10 kg of zinc in the later years or 50  percent  gypsum plus 10 tonnes of green 
manual plus 22 kg of zinc once in 2 to 3 years.  
So, this is how we can will supply the zinc in the soil. Also , we can do seed treatment or root 
dripping in 2  percent  zinc oxide suspension in moderate zinc-deficient  soils and also , we can 
do midseaso n correction by spraying 0.5  percent  zinc sulphate thrice at weekly intervals and 
also we can grow zinc tolerant varieties li ke Vikas, Rasi  these are all rice varieties. So, we 
can grow these zinc tolerant varieties to cope up with the zinc deficiency .  (Refer Slide Time:  16:36)  
 
In case of copper soil and foliar applications are both effective and in case of soil application 
we should apply 1 to 5 kg per hectare of copper sulphate pentahydrate which contains 24  
percent  copper and foliar application of co pper sulphate at the rate of 0.2  percent  
concentration can be also done . In case of boron we already know that we have to apply basal 
soil application of boron of 1.1 to 2 kg per hectare , foliar application of boron at the 
flowering stage of the crop is al so beneficial .  
For hidden deficiency that means, the plant has deficiency but it is not showing any 
deficiency symptoms we call it hidden hunger also. So, for this hidden deficiency we can 
spray 0.2 percent boric acid or borax at p re-flowering stage or ou r flower head formation 
stages . What are the rice varieties like IET 20979 , IET 2 1007 and IET 21014 showed 
increased grain number , filled spikelet and a significant increment in grain yield by 4 to 8 
percent  of application of boron. So, these are some of t he ways to which you can apply the 
boron fertilizer .  (Refer Slide Time:  17:51)  
 
What about iron? Now seed treatment with 2  percent  ferrous sulphate heptahydrate solution 
or slurry can be one way one of the ways also foliar sprays of 1 to 2 percent  of fe rrous 
sulphate heptahydrate ferrous ammonium sulphate at pH 5.2 solution or of chelates at weekly 
interval at early stage of deficiency can be successful and combination of green manure or 
organic manual with foliar spray of one percent ferrous sulphate he ptahydrate or ferrous 
ammonium sulphate solution can be also done .  
In case of manganese foliar spray 3 to 4 times at the rate of 0.5 to 1 percent  of M nSO4  
solution which is around 5 to 15 kg of manganese per hectare. Now, in case of rice at tillering 
stage about 200 litre water per hectare, so, this is a foliar spray. In case of soil application , we 
should apply this MnSO4.H2O  at 40 to 50 kg per hectare . Durum wheat is more susceptible 
than aestivum wheat for manganese deficiency and we should apply farmya rd manure or 
straw . We can also incorporate the straw in the soil to improve the manganese deficiency.  (Refer Slide Time:  19:23)  
 
So, if we see the methods and rate of micronutrient application to wheat, we can see here , 
these are some deficient element s like zinc and these are the sources so, zinc we should apply 
as zinc sulphate , copper we should apply copper sulphate manganese MnSO4, Fe, FeSO4,  
boron, borax , molybdenum , sodium molybdate and this is , these are the suggested rates in kg 
per area hectare  elements so, we can apply 5 to 10 for zinc as broadcast , band application 
should be 3 to 5 kg per hectare. And foliar applications should be 15 to 250 gramme. So, 
similarly for copper and for manganese and for boron and molybdenum are given here and 
this is for the wheat crop.  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:17)  
 Now, what are the recommendations ? So high yielding varieties and also intensive cropping 
with high analysis NPK fertilizer  and limited use of organic manures and less recycling of 
crop residues led to th e depletion of micronutrients from the soil reserves . So, what happens? 
These are some of the important factors which results in depletion of micronutrients from the 
soil like high yielding varieties , intensive cropping with high analysis, NPK fertilizer , limited 
use of organic manure , and less recycling of crop residues.  
They are the major reason for micronutrient deficiency in the soil and application of chemical 
fertilizer  along with organic manure and micronutrients helps to maintain sustain this 
avail ability of nutrients in the soil. FY M, this is the most common organic matter source , 
organic fertilizer  in Indian condition helps to counteract the lime induced micronutrient 
deficiency in the soil.  
So, generally when we apply the lime that can increase the soil pH and when it increases the 
soil pH several nutrients become unavailable. So, when we apply the farmyard m anure there 
are several organic acids that can help to reduce or stabilise the pH in the normal range so 
that most of the micronutrients can  be available. So, also another ways integrated nutrient 
management which can increase the micro nutrient use efficiency, application of 
micronutrients to foliar application also increase crop yield and can be economical over soil 
application.  
So, these a re some of the when we apply these micronutrients to foliar application can also 
increase the crop yield and of course, this is more economical than application of these 
fertilizers  that were in soil.  (Refer Slide Time:  22:18)  
 
So, let us see some case studies , so, of this micronutrient fertilization .  
(Refer Slide Time:  22:22)   
 
So, seeing it all in 2006 have found that this is an effect of silicon  on the yield and quality of 
the rice. So, we can see when the treatment of silicon  in kg per hectare incr eases from 60 to 
120 to 180 kg per hectare , then grain yield, we can see has continuously increased from 6.16 
tonne per hectare to 6.45 to 6.59. In case of straw yield also it was increased 10.14 tonnes per 
hectare to 10.61 tonnes per hectare to 10.80 tonn es per hectare. And protein yield can also be 
seen increasing when we increase the silicon application or when we increase the silicon 
application in that crop.  (Refer Slide Time:  23:17)  
 
We have you know this Merino Greg ichevich, et al  in 2021 they hav e seen the effect of 
applying spring spraying programmes on stabilised fruit yield per plant. So, we can see that 
when they apply different types of micronutrient fertilizers  like boron and zinc in 
combination , we can see the increase they are in that frui t yield. So, this is another important 
aspect of what one of the important case studies showing the importance of fertilizer  
application or micronutrient fertilizer  application .  
(Refer Slide Time:  24:02)  
 
And this is also application of different zinc c oated formulations. So, we can see here Nazir , 
et al in 2021 , they have calculated 3 parameters, one is plant height and other is spike length 
and other is  spike length and number of tillers per plant in case of wheat and they have given different types of  formulation of urea. Where T0 stands for no zinc and T1 stands for 
recommended zinc , T2 stands for different types of zinc coated urea.  
So, we can see that when we apply different types of zinc coated urea that can improve the 
yield and other parameters.  Sorry, the plant height and spike  length and number of tillers 
alerts as compared to the no fertilizer  condition fertilization  condition where no zinc was 
applied. So, that shows the importance of application of zinc for growth of the plant.  
(Refer Slide  Time:  25:22)  
 
So, this makes the end of this whole week 5. So, in a nutshell, in this week we have seen the, 
the micronutrients and we have seen the basic, their basic overview, their sources, the 
micronutrients cycle, what are the critical stages? What are the deficiency symptoms ? How? 
What are the remedial measures to correct those deficiency symptoms?  
What are the strategies , management strategies to correct these micronutrient deficiency 
symptoms ? We have seen we have also seen the some quasi essenti al elements like silicon  
and why it is important for rice cultivation. So, these are some of the references which I have 
used for this lecture.  (Refer Slide Time:  26:16)  
 
And please feel free to go and see them in details and if you find any difficulty,  just let us 
know, and we will  be happy to answer your queries. So , guys that the by this we are 
wrapping, wrapping up this week 5 of this NPTEL  online certification course of soil fertility 
and fertilizers . And let us meet in week 6 to discuss more about soil fertility and fertilizers . 
Thank you very much.  