Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture: 36  
Organic Manures, Manufacturing, Properties,  
and Fate of N, P, K and Micronutrient  Fertilizer s 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:36)  
 
Welcome friends to this new week of NPTL online certification course of Soil Fertility and 
Fertilizers. We are going to start week  8 lectures. And the topic of this week is basically 
Organic Manures  as well as Manufacturing Properties and Fate of N , P, K and other 
Micronutrie nt Fertilizers. So, not only we wi ll be focusing on discussing about different 
manures , we will be also discussing the manufacturing of different nutrient different different 
macronutrient and micronutrien t fertilizers. So, in this first lecture, that is lecture number 36, 
we are going to di scuss these following concepts.  (Refer Slide Time: 1:08)  
 
We are going to first discuss about the components of sustainable agriculture. Then we are 
going to discuss about difference between manures  and fertilizers. And then we are going to 
discuss about characteristics of bulk organic manures . And then we are going to discuss about 
classification of manures  and compost.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:29)  
  
These are the key words first of all fertilizers, organic manure, compost, NADEP  and 
Coimbatore  method, these are some of the keywords which we  are going to discuss. So, let us 
start discussing about manure . Now, these manures  and fertilizers these are essential 
component o f sustainable agriculture because, if we want to sustain the soil fertility as well as 
productivity, we need the application of both manure  and fertilizers.  
Now, what is the basic difference between manure  and fertilizers, the manures  are organic in 
natur e, plant or animal origin and contain organic matter in large proportion and plant 
nutrients in small quantities and are used to improve soil productivity by correcting so il’s 
physical, chemical and biological properties.  
Now, the basic idea of manure  or it is organic in nature, it is either plant origin or animal 
origin and it contains organic matter in large proportion and small quanti ties of nutrients. So, 
also at the same time they improve the soil productivity by correcting soil physical chemical 
and biological properties. In contrast, fertilizers are having definite chemical composition 
with a higher analytical value and capable of supplying plant nutrients in available forms. So, 
these are basically synthetic chemicals which can supply the plant nutr ients in higher quantity 
and they can supply these nutrients and available forms. So, this is the basic difference 
between manure  and fertilizer.  (Refer Slide Time: 3:32)  
 
Now, if we see, if we want to see more differences between manures  and fertilize rs, we can 
see that manures  contain organic matter and thereby it improves the soil physical properties 
whereas, fertilizer do not contain organic matter and cannot improve soil physical properties. 
Manures  on the other hand can contain all plant nutrients , but small in concentration.  
So, since it is majorly organic matter, it can contain different nutrients both macro and 
micronutrients, but, they are present in very small concentration. However, since fertilizers 
are synthetic in nature, they can contain  one or more nutrients, but in higher concentration. In 
case of manure  we required these manure in large quantity, these are mostly bulky in nature 
and of course, costly.  
In contrast, fertilizers are required in less quantity then manures  and they are con centrated 
and the comparatively cheaper than manure . In case of manure  nutrients are slowly available 
upon decomposition. Whereas in case of fertilizers nutrients are readily available. In case of 
manure  we can see long lasting effects soil and crop wherea s in case of fertilizer, there is very 
less residual effect. In case of manure  there is no salt effect or no adverse effect however, in 
case of fertilizers salt effect is high and adverse effects are also observed if we apply them in 
higher quantity. So, t hese are the some of the major differences between manures  and 
fertilizers.  (Refer Slide Time: 5:32)  
 
Now, if we see the components of sustainable agriculture as we have discussed sustainable 
agriculture can is an interplay of many components, what are  these components , first of all 
intercropping is one of the major component then crop rotation, then manu ring, then different 
bio-agents which we are going to discuss like bio fertilizers, then conservation tillage , green 
manuring,  agroforestry. So, all th ese are components of sustainable agriculture and we are 
going to focus on manures  and fertilizers in this week.  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:15)  
  
Now, let us now discuss in details about organic manures . Now, if we classify the manure  
they are  of mainly 2 types we can see that the major classification of manures  bulky organic 
manure  and concentrated organic manure . Now, bulky and concentrated organic manure  
mainly differ in the amount of manure  requirements , so bulky organic manures  are required 
in bulk quant ity however, concentrated organic manures  record in comparatively less 
quantity.  
Now, these bulky organic manures  are mainly derived from animal plant and other organic 
waste and green plant tissues. Whereas, this concentrated organic manure  are can be 
classified into oil clicks , blood meal , meat meal and other considered organic manure . So, 
this bulky organic manure  are mainly derived from animal plant and other organic wastes and 
green  plant tissues and they can be classified into 2 major class one is ca lled farm  yard 
manure and other is green manure .  
Now, this farm yard manure is basically well decomposed animal plant and other organic 
residues however, green manure basically that decompose plant tissues. So, there are several 
plants like dhaincha, glyr icidia  and other leguminous crop which you can use as grain manure  
to increase not only the organic matter but also, they can also improve the soil physical 
conditions. Now, when we discuss about the concentrated organic manure , this concentrated 
organic manure , the one of the major concentrate organic manure  are oil cakes.  
Now , oil cakes are again divided into non-edible  oil cake or edible oil cakes. Now , non-edible  
oil cakes can you can cannot feed to cattle however, edible oil cakes you can use as a fee d to 
the cattle what are the examples of edible oil cakes, mustard, oil cake groundnut oil cake et cetera  are examples of edible oil cake however non-edible  oil cakes are mahua,  neem oil cake 
et cetera,  we are going to discuss these in details.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 8:51)  
 
Now, let us first let us now discuss the word bulky or getting manure . Now, the definition of 
the bulk organic manure says that these are the manures  of plant and animal origin which 
when added to the soil in bulk amount tend to decrease the bulk density and increase the soil 
volume thus providing better physical condition for plant growth especially in coarse textured 
soils and also provide essential nutrients in smaller quantities than chemical fertilizers. So, as 
the definition says the se manures  are required  in bulk quantity in tons per hectare basis. And 
when we apply this manure in bulk quantity, they can supply the nutrients at the same time 
they can improve the soil physical and as well as chemical properties.  (Refer Slide Time: 9:57)  
 
Now , let us discuss some of the important characteristics of bulk organic minute . Now, 
organic manures  are relatively poorer in the concentration of the plant nutrients and these 
materials possesses  wider CN ratio and carbon sulfur ratios and suppl y energy needed for 
microorganisms. The mineral nutrients in the organic materials became available to plants 
after mineralization, we know that that these are mainly organic matter and through 
mineralization process, the organic form of nutrients convert into inorganic forms. And 
finally, a judicious combination of organic manures  is essential to maintain the fertility status. 
For example, FYM,  compos t, green  manure  biogas slurry,  sewage or sludge , molasses and 
vermicompost can be mixed together to produce  to maintain the soil fertility status.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:03 )  
 So, let us discuss more about farm  yard and manure . Now, if we see the definition of the farm 
yard Manure  it says that the physical composition of cattle manure is called farm  yard 
manur e which consists of dung  and urine  of cattle and the lit ter which is a bedding materials 
like hay , straw used for cattle so these can be used as a bedding material.  
Now, remember that this cattle manure is slow acting , bulky and low analysis fertilizer . Low 
analysis means it con tains low quantity of nutrients  and this cattle manure is obtained from 
dung and u rine of farm animals mixed with litter and other miscellaneous farm wastes. As 
you can see, below these photographs are showing the preparation of farm yard  manure .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:00 ) 
 
And on an average well decomposed farm yard manure  contains 0.5  percent  nitrogen 0.2  
percent  P 2 5 and 0.5  percent  K2O.  The present method of preparing this farmyard manure  by 
the farmers is generally defective. So, urine which is wasted content 1  percent  of nitrogen and 
1.35 percent  potassium, nitrogen present in urine is mostly in the form of urea, which is 
subjected to volatilization losses yo u already know what is volatilization loss?  Now, even 
during the stor age nutrients are lost due to leaching and volatilization.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:45 )  
 
Then also, it is practically impossible to avoid losses altogether but it can be reduced by 
following improved method of preparation of farm  yard manure . So, how do y ou prepare the 
farm  yard manure ? First of all, you dug trenches of size 6 meter to 7.5-meter  length 1.5-meter  
2-meter  width and 1-meter  depth and all available  litter and refuse is mixed with soil and 
sprayed in the shade so as to observe the urine.  
(Refe r Slide Time: 13:24 )  
 
The next morning you urine -soaked  refuse along with dung is collected and placed in the 
trench . A section of the trench from one inch should be taken up for filling  with daily 
collection. When the section is filled up to a height of  45 centimeter to 60 centimeter above 
the ground level. The top of the heap is made into dome and plastered with cow dung or slurry. The process is generally continued and when the first trench is completely filled, 
second trench is prepared , so this is ho w this farm yard manure  is being prepared.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:07 )  
 
Now the manure  becomes ready for use in about 4 to 5 months after plastering. Now , if urine 
is not collected in the bedding it can be collected along with washing of the cattle shed i n a 
cemented pit from which it is later added to the farm yard  manure  pit. So, this is how you 
prepare the farmer manure .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:31 )  
 
Now , partially rotten  farmyard manure has to be applied 3 to 4 weeks before sowing while 
well rotten  farm yard manure can be applied immediately before sowing . So, when it is well rotten  the availability of the nutrients are quite fast. So , you can apply that well rotten  manure  
immediately before the sowing . Generally,  10 to 20 ton per hectare of this manure  is applied. 
So, you will see that most of the recommen dation you will see that 10 ton  per hectare basis 
they have recommended but more than 20 ton per hectare is applied to fodder grasses and 
vegetables.  
Now , in such cases farmyard manure should be appli ed at least 15 days in advance to avoid 
immobilization of nitrogen. So, depending on your crop, whether it is a field crop, whether it 
is a fodder crop, whether it is a vegetable, you have to apply this farm yard manure at 
different rates.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:38 ) 
 
Now, vegetable crops like potato, tomato, sweet potato, carrot, radish, onion , et cetera . They 
can respond well to the farming manure . They are generally known to respond well to farm  
yard manure . The other respon sive crops are sugarcane rice,  napier grass and orchard crops 
like oranges, banana , mango and plantation crop like coconut.  
So, the entire amount of nutrients present in farmyard manure  is not available i mmediately 
remember that about 3 0 percent  of the nitrogen 60 to 70  percent  of the  phosphorus and 70  
percent  of the potassium are available  to the first crop. So , this is very important 
consideration when you apply this farmer yard manure.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:09)  
 
Now, when you  covere d the farm  yard manure the next important bulky  organic manure  is 
compost. Now , compost is a product of the decomposition of plant and animal wastes with 
various additives. Now , the compost had the largest variation of all organic materials ranging 
from neglected garbage dumps to carefully composted an d treated substances with high 
fertility.  
Now , what is composting ? Composting is the process of compost making. So , composting is 
essentially the process of converting organic matter into manure in a short time by 
accelerating the fermentation process und er control condition. So , composting is mediated by 
different microorganisms, it i s a microorganism mediated process.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:24)  
 Now, let us discuss about methods of composting. Now, the process of composting were first 
initiated in Engl and during the period of First World War. Since then, the various systems of 
composting have been developed. And some of them are mentioned here like agriculture 
development company or ADCO  process, activated co mpost process, I ndore process, 
Bangalore proc ess, Coimbatore  process , NADEP method , rainwater compost, rural compost, 
urban compost , vermicompost . Now, we are going to focus the 3 major methods of compost 
production Indore process, Bangalore process and 4 method actually Indore process , 
Bangalore process, Coimbatore  process and NADEP  process of compost making.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:16 )  
 
So, let us start discussing about the Coimbatore method. Now, in the Coimbatore method, 
what we do composting is done in pi ts of different sizes depending on the wa ste material 
available. So, a layer of waste material is first laid in the pit and it is moistened with a 
suspension of 5 to 10 kg cow  dung in 2.5 to 5 liter of water and 0.5 to 1 kg of fine bone meal 
sprinkled over it uniformly. So first of all, you first  lay a waste material in the pit and then 
you moisten it with this slurry of cow dung and water and bone m eal.  
Now, similar layers are laid over one another till the material rises 0.75 meters above the 
ground level. It is finally plastered with wet mud a nd left undisturbed for  8 to 10 weeks. That 
means 2 to 2 and a half months. Plaster is then removed material moistened with water and 
then we turn the material and made into a rectangular heap under the shed and it is unlived 
undisturbed till it s use. So, this is called Coimbatore method this is one of the important 
methods of compost making.  (Refer Slide Time: 19:43 )  
 
The next process is the Indore  method. So, in this method organic wastes are sprayed in the 
cattle shed to serve as bedding. Now , urine -soaked  material along with dung is removed 
everyday and for m int o a layer of about 15-centimeter -thick  at suitable sites . Urine soaked 
earth scrap ed from the ca ttle shed is mixed with water and sprinkle over a layer of waste 
twice or thrice a day. Now, this  layering process really it continues for about a fortnight or 15 
days.  
So, a thin layer of w ell decomposed  compost is sprinkled over the top of the heap given and 
given a turning and reform. So, this old compost  when you sprinkle the old compost these 
basically acts as inoculum for decomposing the material. So , that the heap of compost is left 
undisturbed for about a month and then it is roughly or thoroughly moistened, and given a 
turning the compost is generally in this method , Indore  method is ready fo r application in 
another month. So , this is another method that is called Indore  method.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:10 ) 
 
Third method is Bangalore method. In the Bangalore method, what happens dry waste 
material of 25 centimeter thick is sprayed in a p it and  a thick suspension of cow  dung in 
water is sprinkle over for moistening . A thin layer of dry waste is laid over the moisten ed 
layer and the pi t is filled alternatively we dry layers of materials and Cow  dung  suspension, 
till it rises 0.5 meter above the g round level. Now, it is left exposed without covering for 15 
days or a fortnight. Now, it is given a turning , plastered with we t mud and left undisturbed for 
about 5 months or till required so this is called Bangalore method of composting.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:04 ) 
 
The f inal composting method which we a re going to discuss is called NADEP  method. So, 
this NADEP  method of composting was introduced by this fellow N.D.  Pandharipande from Maharashtra and these composting takes place in constructed brick  tanks . So, this is the 
constructe d brick tank and around 2.5 tons  of compost can be prepared in short period of 4 
months using this method.  
What are the raw materials ? These raw materials are agricultural waste like weeds, crop 
residues forest litter and we require  around 1350 to 1400 kg of this agricultural waste. Apart 
from that we need 9 0 to 1 00 kg of cattle dung or bio ga s slurry . Apart from that we required  
1675 kg of finely sieved  soil and around 1400 liters  of water. So, these are the components of 
raw m aterials of NADEP method of composting.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:16 ) 
 
So, how to construct this b rick tank. So, first day rectangular tank using bricks and mud 
should be constructed near to cattle shed or farm , so tanks can be constructed either using 
mud o r cement mortar. So basically,  generally we use the mud to seal the inner side of the of 
the tank and to ensure these aerations  6-inch vents are provided by removing the alternate 
brick  after the height of 1 feet from the bottom of the tank. And all 4 walls of the tank need to 
be plastered with cow  dung slurry before filling it. Now , this helps to facilitate the microbial 
activity from all 4 sides of the tank. So , this is how you prepare this tank for NADEP method.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:15 )  
 
 
 Now , how to fill thi s tank. In the first layer,  4 to 6 inch of stems and sticks at sprayed at the 
bottom to facilitate the aeration it is followed by a 4 to 6 inch of agricultural waste, which 
weighs  about 10 to 00 kg. In the second layer a slurry that is made up  of 4 to 5 kg of cow  
dung and 100 to 125 liters  of water is sprinkle over the dry wastes  to facilitate the microbial 
activity. In the third layer 60 kg of sieved  dry soil is spread evenly over the second layer for 
moisture retention  and this layer also act s as a buffer during the biodegradation of the 
material .  
In the next step the entire tank needs to be filled by the same process within 24 hours not 
more than 48 hours of time. Now, a layer of 3-inch sieved sand should be sprayed and sealed 
ultimately wit h a layer of cow  dung and mud plaster. After 15 to 30 days, the volume of the 
material gets reduced to 2 feet and is refilled with the layer of the driveway slurry and s and. 
Now, the entire mass is covered with the thatched  roof to prevent the loss of mois ture from 
the tank.  
Now , the tank is left undisturbed for 3 months. Meanwhile, water  is added for every 1 or 2 
weeks to maintain the moisture percentage of the tank now, if the tank develops any cracks, 
those can be filled with the slurry to maintain the quality of the compost. So , guys, this is 
how you prepare th is NADEP compost we have now discuss the difference between manures  
and fertilizers. We have discussed about the bulky organic manure  like farm  yard manure , 
how to prepare the farm  yard manure?  And we have also discussed about the compost and 
several methods of compost preparation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:29 )  
 Let us wrap up this lecture here. These are some of the references which are used for this 
lecture. And let us wrap up this lecture here. I n the next lecture, we are going to we are going 
to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of composting and also, we are going to learn 
about concentrated organic manure  and then we are going to learn about green manure . 
Thank you very much. Let us meet  in our next lecture.  
 
 
 