Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur   
Lecture : 35 
Soil Health and Quality, Problem Soil, Land Capability Classification (Contd.)  
Welcome friend s to this 5th lecture of week 7 of NPTE L online certification course of soil 
fertility and fertilizers. And in this week we are talking about soil health and quality and 
problems soil and land ca pability classification.  
Now, in our previous lectures we hav e discussed about soil degradation, what is the 
degradation status of world soil as well as Indian style, how Anthropocene activities can 
degenerate soil also we have discussed about the soil health and soil health indicators, what is 
soil qua lity what are  the soil quality index? How to calculate the soil quality index? What are 
the linear methods and nonlinear methods of scoring and how to calculate different types of 
soil quality index ? 
And then we have discussed about the soil health card and soil implic ation of soil health card , 
what are the different aspects of soil health card and then model village program we have 
discussed also we have discussed about soil acidity causes of soil acidity, what are the ways 
through which we can manage soil acidity we h ave discussed . 
We have also started discussing about soil affected soil what are the 3 different types of salt 
affected  soil we have discussed like saline soil, alkali soil and s aline alkali  soil and what are 
their characteristics ? How we can differentiate  them and what are there ill effects we have 
discussed. So, in this lecture we are going to discuss how to correct the soil salinity or soil  
sodicity ? What are the ways through which we can correct the soil salinity and soil so dicity 
and then we are going to discuss about phytoremediation of salt  affected  soils. 
And finally, we are going to discuss a new thing that is land capability classification how we 
can classify land or designated land based on its quality ? So, we are going to discuss all of 
these . (Refer Slide Time: 2:49)  
 
These are the concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture. First of all, reclamation of  
salt affected soil , then phytoremediation of salt affected soil, then mechanism involved in salt 
removal by pla nts, the land capa bility classification for agricultural land and then land 
capability classification for permanent vegetation, pasture and forestry. So, these are the 
concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:18)  
 
These are some of the keyw ords of this lecture like soil salinity, then phytoremediation , 
halophyte , land suitability , land class, these are some of the keywords of this lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 3:34)  
 
Now, if we go ahead and see what are the methods of measurement of salt a ffecte d soil? 
There are different ways to which we can measure the salinity of the soil. We have already 
discussed in our soil testing discussion, but measurement of soil samples I have again jotted 
down those . So, you can see that EC e represents conductiv ity of the solution extracted from 
the water saturated soil paste , then EC p is conductivity of the water saturated soil paste itself , 
then conductivity EC w is conductivity of the solution extracted from the soil water mixture 
usually either 1 is to 2 or 1 is to 5 and then EC 5 is conductivity of a 1 is to 1, 1 is to 2 or 1 is 
to 5 soil water mixture itself.  
And TDS is total dissolved solids in water or the solution extracted from a water saturated 
soil paste. So, these are the parameters which generally meas ure on soil sample and then EC a 
and EC  star a so these are measured on bulk soil in place so EC a basically apparent 
conductivity or bulk so il sensed by metal electrodes in soil whereas EC a is basically 
electromagnetic induction of an electric current using  surface transmitter and receiving coils . 
So, these are different ways to which we can measure the soil salinity.  (Refer Slide Time: 5:18)  
 
Now, let us see the reclamation of salt affected soil, if we see if we consider t he reclamation 
of the salt a ffected soil, there are 3 types of methods which are important for reclaiming th e 
salt affected soil, first of all physical methods second one is biological methods and the third 
category is chemical methods. Now, there are different types of physical methods  or 
management interventions, which you can use.  
However, in case of biological methods, this biological method s are of 2 types, one is 
microbial remediation, another one is phytoremediation. So, microbial remediation and 
phytoremediation, we are going to  focus on phytoremediation in our upcoming slides.  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:17)  
 So, if you see the effect on chemical properties of the soil, we can see that salinity  impacts 
not only the electrical conductivity, but also impact the pH and sodium absorptio n ratio we 
have already seen that. So, salinity,  reclaiming salinity  is of very important . 
(Refer Slide Time: 6:44)  
 
Now , if we see the integrated management of salt affected soil, there are physical or 
mechanical methods, there are biological methods th ere are chemical methods and hydraulic 
methods are also . Among the physical methods we can see scrapping , land leveling, sanding 
sub soiling these are some of the ways through which we can get rid of salt affected soil. 
Also, in case of biological methods we can see organic matter application just like in case of 
acidic soil, in case of salt affected  soil also . 
Application of organic matter can help in reclamation of salt affected soils. So, when we 
apply organic matter also mulching , green manuring , tree p lantation these are some of the 
ways t o which we can manage the salt a ffecte d soil. In case of hydraulic ways, flushing , 
leaching , improving irrigation or drainage are some of the ways to which we can manage the 
salt affecte d soil. 
And chemical methods are  amendments, application of different amendments, soil 
conditioning, mineral fertilization. So, these are some of the ways through which we can also 
manage the salt affecte d soils.  (Refer Slide Time: 8:06)  
 
So, now, let us focus on phytoremediation of salt affected soil . Phytoremediation or 
vegetative bioremediation or salt affected soil can simply be defined as the cultivation of salt 
accumulating or salt tolerant plants for the reduction of soil salinity or sodic ity or both. So, 
basically we generally  grow some crops which are known to accumulate the salt or tolerate 
the salt concentration in the soil.  
So, basically plants which have ability to grow under high salt concentration due to presence 
of different mechanism of soil tolerance are known as halophytes  or salt tolerating plants. 
Now, if you go to the mangrove forest, you will see this halophytic plants which have 
developed their own physiological mechanism to withstand these high soil salinity. So, they 
can also use new metaphor to absorb the moi sture. So, this type of modification we can see in 
these in this in these different plants which have grown in highly saline soils.  (Refer Slide Time: 9:37)  
 
Now, what are the criteria for selecting plant use in phytoremediation ? How we can select ?  
This plant is good for salt phytoremediation. Now, species which can achieve normal growth 
in salt affected soils and accumulate high quantities of salt are the best candidates for 
phyto remediation of salt affected soils.  
Those also those which can produce greater biomass, together with the capac ity to tolerate 
salinity,  sodicity  and periodic inundation are the best choice for remediating salt affected 
areas. Finally,  the plants which provides some economic part like food and fodders along 
with salt tolerant  capacity are very effective to be used for phytoremediation. So, these are 
some of the criteria for selecting the plant for phytoremediation of salt affected soils.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:41 )  
 Now, the halophyte  or salt reclaiming plants can be classifi ed into 3 categories one is 
exclude r, second is accumulat or and third one is conduct or. What are the exclud er? Exclude r 
are those plants which prevent salts from entering their tissues. Secondly, accumulators 
which uptake and accumulate salts in the tissue s and third one is conductor which absorb 
salts and excrete them by salt gland into air.  
So, the excluder can prevent the entry of the salt , accumulator can accumulate in the tissues 
and conductor can remove or excrete the salt by salt gland into air. So, these are some of the 
ways through which halophyte can operate.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:47 )  
 
Now, what are the mechanisms which are involved in salt removal by plants ? 
Phyto accumulation, acidification , phytotransformation , and phytostabilization, these a re the 4 
methods through which the plants can reclaim the salt affected soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:10 )  
 
Now, let us discuss them one by one. Let us first discuss what is phytoaccumulation ? Now 
plant uptake salts from soil and store high concentration of salt especially sodium and 
chlorine in their shoot in the ionic form. For example, cynodon dactylon  accumulate sodium 
and chlorine ions in salt gland. Also, thinopyrum accumulate s salt in their cell. 
Phyto stabilization , what is phytostabilization ? So phytostabilization  involves 2 mechanisms. 
First of all, immobilization of salts an d accumulation of salts in ro ot rat her tha n in shoot. For 
example, populas  alba is a plan t which can accumulate 90 percent  of the sodium in the root 
rather than in the shoot . So, this is an example of phytostabilization . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:10 )  
 Phytotransformation is absorption of soil times that occurs at high levels in soil and then the 
salts move into the plant tissue and then finally breaks down into either less toxic o r non-
toxic  compound via several metabolic steps. So, this is the way through which 
phytotransformation works.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:35 )  
 
Now, let us see some examples of the plants which are selected for cultivation on salt 
affected lands. If we consid er the tree species eucalyptus , acacia, prosopis these are some of 
the examples of tree species or trees which can grow in salt effective soils in case of grasses 
leptochloa  and then sporobolus , cynodon these are some of the gras ses which can grow in the 
salt affecte d soil.  
In case of bushes, you can see at lriplex,  then s uaeda  and kochia these are some of the b ushy 
plants which are known for their salt tolerance. And in case of crop plants, we can see 
hordeum vulgare then brassica and sorghum these are som e of the crop plants by the way, I 
must also tell you that rice is a salt tolerant plant some of their varieties of rice can tolerate 
high salt concentration in the soil. So these are some of the plants these plants which are 
selected for cultivating in th e salt affected  lands.  (Refer Slide Time: 14:57 )  
 
So, far we have seen different reclamation  measures for saline soil. Now, let us also discuss 
the how to reclaim the sodic soils?  Now, the major principle of reclaiming the sodic soil is 
replacing the so dium ion with calcium ion. Now, the pH of the soil is can be reduced by 
adding an acid forming substance. So, Gypsum is generally used to reclaim sodic soil where 
exchange complex does not have calcium ions.  
So, when we apply gypsum that can help in replac ing the sodium by calcium in the exchange 
complex. Otherwise, any acid forming substance can be used to reclaim where calcium ions 
are present in the exchange  complex. So, there are different types of acid forming substances 
which you can also apply to rec laim the sodic soil where calcium ions are present in the 
exchange  complex. So, there are different ways through which we can reclaim the sodic soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:09 )  
 
Here you can see the examples of reclamation of sodic soil by gypsum. So, h ere sodium 
bicarbonate when it reacts with calcium sulfate or gypsum, it produces calcium carbonate 
sodium sulfate carbon dioxide, which escapes into the atmosphere and water and this calcium 
sulfate reacts with sodium carbonate to produce calcium carbonat e and sodium sulfate.  
So, these calcium sulfate reacts with these col loidal surface removing the sodium to produce 
these… and then replacement of the sodium can be done by this calcium ion and thereby 
stabilizing the soil and thereby reclaiming this sodic soil. 
Also addition of H2SO4  can react with sodium bicarbonate to produce this sodium sulfate 
and also sodium carbonate can react with H2SO4 to produce the sodium sulfate. So, 
ultimately that impact in the reclamation of sodic soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:24)  
 
Now, let us discuss the last concept of this week 7 that is land capability classification. Now, 
this classification of land provides guidelines for rational use of land. So, land capability 
classification provide guidelines for future orientation  of land use. So, the capability is the 
inherent capacity of the land to perform at a given level for general land use.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:08 )  
 
So, let us see what is land capability classification ? So, land capability classification is 
defined as a system of grouping land in  to various classes based on inherent limitations 
imposed on sustained use by soil attributes , topography drainage and climate. So, the motto 
of these or the objective of this land capability classification is used land according to his 
capacity and treat it as per its need.  So, the capability classes falls into groups on e suited  for cultivation and other is not suited for 
cultivation. Each group is further subdivided into 4 capability based on intensity of hazards 
and limitation of use. Thus, land is classified into 8 land capability classes under 2 broad 
groups as land suitable for agriculture and other uses which include class 1 to class 4 lands .  
And then the other category that is land not suitable for agriculture but very wel l suited for 
forestry, grassland and wildlife which include from class 5 to class 8 lands.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:34 )  
 
So, this land capability classification is basically system that groups soils based on their 
potential for agriculture and other users.  What are the other benefits ? Because it helps 
determine land capability and degr adation risk. It is based on the major soil physio chemical 
parameters like soil texture, slope, organic matter and other soil limitations data and it uses a 
system of 8 class es and 10 sub classes.  
Classes basically determine the land current best use and subclasses deter mine which soil 
indicators are limiting the potential of the soil. So, if you see here, this land capability 
classification can be divided into 2 part one is c lass, which shows the lands current b est use, 
wherea s subclass which shows which  soil indicators are limiting the potential of the soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:41 )  
 
So, let us see some examples. So, the first group is land suitable for cultivation, here  you can 
see from group 1 to group 4. So, group 1 says it is a very good cultivable deep highly 
productive soil land with almost low limitation or very slight hazards . Soil in this class are 
suited for a variety of the crops.  
Group 2 shows good cultivable  land almost level plain or gentle slope, moderate depth , may 
require drainage facility , moderate risk of damage when cultivated a use crop rotation. So, in 
this in this group 2, it is recommended to use the crop rotation. It is these are generally good 
cultivable land, almost level plains to gentle slopes, they have moderate depth , may require 
some damage facility, moderate risk of damage when cultivated.  
Now, group 3 shows , soils are moderate fertility, moderate steep slopes , subjected to more 
severe ero sion, severe erosion and severe risk of damage, but can be used for crops when 
adequate plant cover is maintained. So, we can see that these group 3 shows  moderate 
fertility, moderate steep slopes , subject to more severe erosion and severe risk of damage, but 
also can be used for crops when adequate plant cover is maintained.  
Group 4  land is basically showing these are g ood soils on steep slopes, but problematic with 
severe erosion then, drainage loss can also add severe risk of damage, but may be cultivat ed 
occasionally handled with great care , keep in forage or pasture, but a grain crop may be 
grown or once in 5 to 6 years interval.  So, one thing is that as we are going from group 1 to group 4, the number of limitations are 
growing from group 1 to group 4. So, if we compare these 4 groups of course, these group 1 
is the ideal group of soils as per this land capability classification.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:07 )  
 
Now, let us see the land which are unsuitable for cultivation but suitable for permanent 
vege tation. Now, group 5 is basically land which is to o wet or stony, which makes it 
unsuitable for crop cultivation and also should be used for pasture  or forest ry with no 
limitation . Group  6 shows these are shallow soils on steep slopes. These are used for g razing 
and forestry with minor limitation and grazing should be regulated to preserve plant  cover.  
Group 7 shows these are steep , rough, eroded lands with shallow soils also includes drought ly 
and swampy lands , severe risk of damage even when use for past ure on forestry, strict 
grazing or forest management must be applied and last group is , group 8 which indicates very 
rough land , not suitable even for woodland or grazing , reserves for wildlife and recreational 
or wasteland consideration can be done in thi s type of soil.  
Again we can see that , among these 5, 4 groups of lands also we can see that as we are 
moving from group 5 to group 8, their limitations are also  increasing.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:43 )  
 
So these are some of the ways through which I mean  these are the bases using what  using , 
using these bases we have classified the soils into 2 major categories of suitability  for crops 
and also suitability for permanent vegetation and then we are also subdividing them into other 
categories. So, category 1 to category 4 are useful for crop cultivation . 
However, c ategory 5 to category 8 are useful for permanent vegetation. Now, if we see the 
class 1  to 8 o f course, we can see the best use, so, class 1 shows  the best use is agriculture 
class 2 also so, class 1 to class 3, the best use is agriculture. For class 4 best use  is agricultural 
pasture for group 5, class 5 pasture forestry or wildlife habitat, group 6 pasture rangeland, 
forestry or wildlife habitat . 
Group 7 recreation , forestry or wild life habitat  and group 8 infrastructure and building , 
recreation or wildlife habitat. So, see you can see that depending on the class variation, how 
the suitability of the soil for agriculture and other practices are v ary. So, these group  8 or 
class 8 basically do not it  is not usable for agriculture and not usable for pasture  or forestry 
also.  (Refer Slide Time: 26:28 )  
 
Now, we have also discussed about subclasses. So, let us see some examples of subclasses . 
Whenever we talk about e that shows the erosion risk that i s the soil is likely to be moved by 
wind or washed away by water and then s-a, this stands for soil water storage capacity and s 
stands for  the soil water storage capacity and this is coarse  soil that does not  hold a lot of 
water for plants.  
Soil s-d is ba sically limiting factor the soil depths so the soil is too shallow , s-k is basically a 
limiting factor salinity so, the soil is too salty , s-l is basically lime requirement  so, the soil 
needs extra nutrients to grow crops , s-r surface stoniness , too many s tones on the grounds , s-t 
surface soils textured soil is dominated by sand silt or clay instead of mixed , w-d water tabl e 
depth is the major constraint  so, the water table is close to the surface of the soil , w-f is 
flooding during growing season the amoun t is a major constraint. So the amount of flooding 
could cause some crop damage and w-p is t he permeability is the major limiting factors the 
water moves slow through the soil which can make it waterlogged.  
So, these are the description of different subcl asses under the land capability classification.  (Refer Slide Time: 28:04 )  
 
So, guys, it is now clear for to us that based on the land capability classification, how we can 
justify and also map the suitability of the land for a particular purpose. As yo u can see here, 
this is the Latur  Tehsil  of India. And you can see that land capability classification based map 
of this Latur  Tehsil is there . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:24 )  
 
Also you can see these land capability  classification mapping of the field data wit h or without 
available water capacity as a limitation. So according to these land capability  classification, 
we can see from class 1, to class 7.  (Refer Slide Time: 28:42 )  
 
So this gives you an idea about land capability  classification add its major im pact, I hope that 
you have gathered some good knowledge from this good knowledge from this lecture. And 
now what is land capability  classification is clear to all of you. And let us wrap up this week 
7. And if you have any question, please feel free to let  me know or let or post it in the forum 
so that we can answer your queries. Thank you very much.  
 