Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur   
Lecture : 33 
Soil Health and Quality, Problem Soil, Land Capability Classification (Contd.)  
Welcome friend s to this lecture number 33 of NPTE L online certification course of soil 
fertility and fertilizers. And in this week we are discussing about soil health and quality 
problems soil and land capability classification.  
So, in our previous 2 lectures we have d iscussed about soil degradation and soil health card, 
we have discussed what is the necessity of soil health card scheme, what are the benefits of 
soil health card scheme, what are the different aspects of soil health car d scheme that means, 
how many param eters and how they are made, how these measurements are being done . 
And also we have discussed we have seen the soil health card and the fertilizer 
recommendations and how we can get the fertilizer recommendation in the soil health card. 
So, all these thin gs we have discussed, we have also briefly started discussing about soil 
quality and soil quality index. So, we  will start from there in this lecture and discuss how to 
calculate the soil quality index.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:20)  
 
So, these are the concep ts which we are going to cover in this lecture, comp utation of soil 
quality index , then soil quality framework, then soil quality index value for different 
treatments and experiments and then components of soil functional stability. So, these are the 
some of the concepts which we are going to discuss in this lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 1:42)  
 
These are the key words of this lecture, we are going to learn about soil quality index and 
then indicators scoring, then additive and weight additive index and the n soil resistance and 
soil resilience. So, these are some of the keywords.  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:03)  
 
So, if you recall the soil quality and soil quality index, which we have briefly discussed in our 
last lecture, soil quality is the capacity of the soil  to function. So, and soil quality index 
basically is an indicator , numerical indicator which helps to assess the soil quality of a given 
site or ecosystem. And also it enables comparison between conditions at plot , field or 
watershed level under different  land uses and management practices.  So, for different management practices for different crops, we can calculate the soil quality 
index and there are different methods to calculate the soil quality index which we are going to 
discuss, but before that, pl ease try to remember that soil quality is a broader concept, which 
shows the ability of his soil to function and second soil quality index is an indicator of  soil 
quality numerical indicator  I must say.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:17)  
 
Now, if we see the conce ptualization of dynamic soil quality trends, we  will see that the soil 
quality generally degrades either it can either degrade either it can show some aggravating 
trend or they can be maintained at a sustainable level. So, soil quality can have 3 different  
trend . First of all, it can degrade d, it can degrade over time, it can improve over time or it can 
maintain its level over time. So, in these 3 conditions, we can get 3 different types of tr end.  (Refer Slide Time: 4:03)  
 
So, also we know that soil qua lity attributes are basically an interplay between chemical , 
physical , and biological and when they intersect with each other of course, that also 
encompasses the nutritional aspects or nutritional features also. So, not only the physical, 
chemical , biolog ical, but also nutritional features are also important for the soil quality 
attributes.  
(Refer Slide Time: 4:39)  
 
Now, selection criteria of the indicators now, for calculating the soil quality index, we have to 
first select the indicators. Now, how to select those indicators what should be our 
considerations? First of all, these indicators must be representative of soil function, it should 
be sensitive to change, it can should be easily measured and reproduce, it should be reliable, it should be accessi ble to users , and it should be applicable to field conditions. So, these are 
the selection criteria of the soil quality indicators.  
(Refer Slide Time: 5:34)  
 
Now, in the normal soil testing generally we take care of pH, organic carbon, electrical 
conduc tivity and available phosphorus , potassium and sometime  micronutrients and 
amelior ants like, lime or gypsum. However, for soil quality we take care of, we will consider 
both physical, chemical and biological and also nutritional factors or nutritional indi cators.  
So, this is very important that or it is a comprehensive characterization of soils ability to 
function.  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:18)  
 So, what are the some examples some important physical attributes which are generally  
considered for soil quality are bulk density , maximum water holding capacity and m ean 
weight diameter, I hope you all know about the mean weight diameter and maximum water 
holding capacity  and bulk density I  am not going to discuss those in details, but based on 
these factors or seve ral soil fertility and also soil quality indicators can be I mean, these are 
the soil quality indicators and based on these quality indicators, we can grade a soil as a good 
bad or medium quality .  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:01)  
 
So, some important chemical pr operties or indicators for soil quality are pH, organic carbon , 
available nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, total carbon, nitrogen and potassium non 
exchangeable potassium. So, pH is a very important indicator of soil quality, because most of 
the nutrients are generally available in the mean  range that is in the normal in the neutral 
range and they become unavailable in extreme pH conditions.  
Organic carbon is a very important indicator of soil quality and then total available nitrogen 
phosphorus potassium are also very important indicators of soil fertility and soil quality . 
Total carbon , total nitrogen and also potassium , total potassium is also very important 
indicators of soil quality and also non exchangeable potassium. So, these are important 
chemical attributes of soil quality.  (Refer Slide Time: 8:12)  
 
Now, what are the important biological attributes of soil quality ? Like microbial biomass 
carbon and nitrogen , soil enzymes, mineralizable  carbon and nitrogen , soil biodiversity, soil 
fauna et ceter a. So, more biodiversity more , higher quality soil , more soil fauna beneficial 
soil fauna that means more higher quality of the soil microbial more  microbial biomass 
carbon and nitrogen that means higher quality , higher quality.  
So, these are the indicato rs now, remember that these are very general indicators . Scientists 
across the world are trying to establish novel physical , chemical and biological indicators and 
it is a continuous process you can see that several scientific groups are working for 
develo ping new indicators for calculating the soil quality. So, these list is ever changing. So, 
these are some of the well-known  biological attributes . 
However, the list is continuously updated by the different research groups. And you can see 
that they are als o they  are proposing other biological properties, other chemical properties 
and also other physical properties as indicators of soil quality.  (Refer Slide Time: 9:44)   
 
Now, how to calculate the soil quality index? So, s oil quality index basically also depends on 
these minimum dataset formulation. The minimum data set sometimes we call it M DS, so, 
this MD S formulation  basically depends on several steps first of all you have to define your 
goals and then you have to screen the data.  
Once you screen that data, the next step is to choose the representati ve variables and then 
reducing the redundancy you should not include those variables which are interrelated to each 
other. So, that will basically incorporate the redundancy in the soil quality index model. And 
finally, these minimum data set validation is another important step for calculating the soil 
quality index.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:44 )  
 Now, what are the approach , what is the approach for calculating the soil quality index ? Now, 
calculating the soi l quality index is comprised of generally 3 steps, the first step is selection 
of the indicators. So, this is the first step this is the selection of the indicators. And then 
second step is scoring of the indicators. And third step is ranking the indicator s based on 
relative importance.  
So, first of all, we have to select the correct indicators, and then we have to score them, I a m 
going to show you , how to how we score them and based on their score, we can rank the 
indicator based on their relative import ance. So, the relative importance of indicators, so, how 
to calculate the relative importance of indicators. So, this relative importance of indicators is 
decided based on the kind of soil function involved.  
Now, the minimum data set of indicators and the ir relative importance varies with the type of 
soil function decided. So, the based on the type of the soil function, the minimum data set of 
indicators and their relative importance varies for ranking or deciding weights, there are 
several methods like pr incipal component analyses, then sensitivity analyses, then analytical 
hierarchy process and expert judgment.  
So, these are the different processes through which we can decide the weights of those 
individual, parameters and ther e... So, I am going to show  you how to how we calculate that 
in using the principal component analysis. But remember that these are the 3 general steps . 
First of all, selection of the indicators, then scoring of the indicators, we have to know how 
we score the indicators and finally , we should rank the indicator based on their relative 
importance.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:03 )  
 
Now, if we go ahead and see the framework of this SQI calculation, we can see that first of 
all, we have to select the indicators and then the minimum data se t we have to select because 
we cannot produce redundancy information. So, they are maybe different indicators and 
based on these different indicators, we have to score these different indicators based on 
whether they are good or bad, and then we can integr ate their score to get a final index value 
that is called the soil quality index.  
Now,  these scores should be normal ad dition or it could be weighted  summation  also. Now, 
to judge these weighted su mmations  or to execute these weighted summation , you have to 
first measure the ir, we determine their weights and these weights of individual indicator can 
be determined by using principal component analysis.  
Now, remember that guys, there are different methods for soil quality index calculation, you 
can see that  it is also a continuous process like identifying the soil quality indicators. So, soil 
quality index calculation is also being suggested by different scientific groups. So, we are 
going to discuss here only the most common methods. However, you should rem ember that 
there are also other methods for calculating the soil quality index.  (Refer Slide Time: 14:42 )  
 
So in general there are 2 methods one is simple addit ive soil quality index and other one is 
weighted  addit ive soil quality index. So, these are the 2 generally accepted method and 
people are also nowadays using different other ways to calculate the soil quality index 
however, in this lecture we are going to discuss only these 2 that is simple additive soil 
quality index and weighted addit ive soil quality index.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:12)   
 
So, but before we  discuss about the simple additive and weighted additive, let us first see 
what is scoring and how we do the scoring ? Now, the scoring of the indicator can be of 2 
types one is called linear sco ring and other is nonlinear scoring. So, let us see what is linear 
scoring and what is nonlinear  scoring.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:36 )  
 
Now, in case of linear scoring indicators ranked  in ascending or descending order on whether 
a higher value was consider ed good or bad in terms of soil function. So, basically these 
indicators we generally ranked  in ascending or descending order on based on whether a 
higher value was considered good or bad in terms of soil function for example, if I 
considering  soil or ganic  matter, soil organic matter  higher the value it is considered good.  
So, in this way we should rank either in the ascending order or descending order for more is 
better indicated each observation divided by the highest observed value such as the highest 
observed value received a score of 1. Suppose for organic matter more  is better it is a more is 
better indicator.  
So, for each observation, so, it should be divided by the highest observed value such that the 
highest observed value received a score of 1 and the other values are getting the score of less 
than 1. In opposite the less is better indicators, the lowest observed values divided by each 
observation that the lowest observed value received a score of 1.  
So, in both approaches basically we divide the  value by the highest observed value or lowest 
observed value. So, in the more is better approach, each observation is divided by the highest 
observed value and for less is better the lowest observed value divided by each observation . 
So, that the lowest o bserved value receives a score of 1.  
However, there are some indicators which are in between . There are either not more is better 
or less is better. So, some indicators like pH the observation s score d as higher is better u p to a 
threshold value that is pH  6.5 then scored as lower is better above the threshold. So, here we have they have considered these pH  6.5 as the threshold of pH and the higher is better, up to a 
threshold value that is up to 6.5 and above the threshold that is lower is better.  
So, in this way, if we can score you  will see that when the values are converging towards the 
neutral pH then the will get the higher scores, which basically makes sense because the soil 
should have neutral pH to maintain the optimum supplier of the nutrients. Now, so, this is 
about the linear scoring.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:40 )  
 
Now, let us talk about the nonlinear scoring also. So, nonlinear scoring curves were used to 
interpret that indicator value. So, here you can see this is a nonlinear  scoring curves, whic h 
are generally used to interpret the indicator value. Now, the shape of the each decision 
function typically some variation of a bell shaped curve. So, it could be a bell shaped curve, 
just it like a normal curve where the midpoint optimum is there.  
Othe rwise, there will be a sigmoid curve with an upper asympto te. So these are sigmoid 
curve, t his is a sigmoid curve. So you can see this upper asymptote and a sigmoid curve with 
or a sigmoid curve having a lower asymptote. So this is a lower asymptote where less is 
better. So upper asymptote basically shows the more is better and lower asymptote shows the 
less is better.  
So we determined this  according to the agronomic function using our judgment. We basically 
identify , we give the score. So suppose in the x  axis we are putting any indicator these are 
some hypothetical values so we can get any this is a hypothetical indicator, but you can take a 
particular indicator like available nitrogen maybe then you can put their values and then you can get their scores and then from there you can get there those scores should be used for the 
subsequent calculation . 
For example, scoring included upper asymptote sigmoid curve or more is better function for 
organic carbon mineraliz able nitrogen, alkaline phosphatase and aryl sulphatase , these are 
generally belongs to this zone that is sigmoid function with upper asymptote were more of 
these contents are considered as bet ter for soil quality. So, they are giving more weight for 
these indicators, when they are going to the hig her when we are getting higher quantity of 
these indicators, we are generally giving them higher scores.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:01 )  
 
Now, for example, here is an example. So, here you can see bulk density, we know that as we 
increase the bulk density the re hardness or compactness of the soil increases and when the 
hardness or compactness of the soil increases, that is not useful for maintaining the soil 
quality because that negatively impacts the water and air movement and also that creates 
mechanical res istance for the root growth and plant growth.  
So, of course, you can see the indicator scores are higher at the lower bulk density. However, 
as we increase the bulk density the indicator score goes down. So, this is an example using a 
physical indicator o f soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:55 )  
 
Now, if we see one chemical indicator just like I told you that as the pH is approaching the 
neutral, we are getting higher indicator score and as it is exceeding the neutral pH again this 
indicator score is decreasin g. So, we have to find a threshold and based on that we have to 
assign these indicators score .  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:20 )  
 
Also here you can see these chemical indicators scoring of a chemical indicator. So, here you 
can see as the extractable zinc is in creasing in the soil of course, their indicator score will be 
increased after a particular after threshold, you see that indicator s scores are relatively stable 
because we have got the enough amount of extractable zinc for sustaining the soil quality.  So, 
this is another example of chemical indicators . (Refer Slide Time: 23:05 )  
 
Now, once we calculate all these once we assign the se scores to these physical , chemical and 
biological i ndicators, next step is to integrate them into a single index. So, here yo u can see 
first type is called the additive index, which represents the summation of scores from these 
minimum data set indicators.  
So, here it is very simple, it is a simple summation. The second approach is , this the first 
approach and this the second a pproach that  is called weighted additive index. Now, the 
weighted additive index basically, there is  a weight assignment and these weight assignments 
is basically nothing but this PC weighting factor and S is the indicator score.  
So, here, we are basically  multiplying the indicator score with the principal component 
weighting factor, which we generally get from the principal component analysis. How we do 
that, let me show you.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:14 )  
 
Now, these weighted additive index basically used weights basically use the PCA results or 
principal component analysis result. Now, you know that in case of principal component 
analysis, each PC generally explains a certain amount of the variation in that total data set. 
Now, this percentage is divided b y the total percentage of variation explained by all principal 
components provided the weighting factor for variable choosing under a given PC.  
So, here basically, we take the variation, total percentage of variation explained by all the PC 
and we also ge t the percentage of a particular PC and then we divide the amount of variation 
explained by a particular PC to the by the total percentage of variation then we can get their 
weighted , I mean we can get their weight . And from that weight we will assign that  weight to 
that particular indicator.  (Refer Slide Time: 25:33 )  
 
So, here are some examples are given, you can see here guys it is a comparison  between 7 
different locations for 5 different treatments like control , nitrogen, nitrogen phosphorus, 
nitrog en phosphorus  potassium , and nitrogen phosphorus potassium plus farm yard anure .  
So, you can see here in the first location we can get highest soil quality index of course, it is a 
judicious application both chemical and organic manure  and you can see also  for location 2 
and then location 3, location 4, location 5, locations 6, and location 7 for all these location 
this combination of synthetic as well as the organic manure , synthetic fertilizer plus organic 
manure  gives the best comparatively hi ghest soil quality index score. Now, also these are 
varying from one location to another location. So, this is how we can calculate the soil quality 
index for different treatments . (Refer Slide Time: 26:51 )  
 
Also, we can also calculate the soil qual ity index as ne t effect of aggradat ion that is 
improvement of soil quality or degradation of the soil quality of experimental soil treatments. 
So, you can see here there are 5 different treatments . First treatment is control, second 
treatment is 100  percent  nitrogen phos phorus potassium and third treatment is 75  percent  of 
NPK and a plus 25  percent  of FY M and fo urth treatment is 75  percent  NPK and 25  percent  of 
PS and then T 5 is basically 75  percent  of NPK and 25  percent  of GM are remaining .  
So, basically when we add whe n we compare then we can see that in this T3 and  T5 where 
we are applying the man ure with the synthetic NPK we are getting the positive or improved 
soil quality index . For the rest of the cases where we are only using the fertilizer, chemical 
synthetic fer tilizer then we are getting negative soil quality index. So, that shows the 
importance of judicious and integrated nutrient management for maintaining the soil quality.  (Refer Slide Time: 28:21 )  
 
Now soil quality change over the fallow condition under d ifferent management practices and 
cropping system is also being given here . You can see for control system you can see for rice -
rice, we are getting  negative changes in the rice-rice system soil quality , for if we use the 
nitrogen only we are also getting negative changes , for NPK we are getting slightly positive 
change . 
However, again NPK plus FY M we are getting positive changes. So, you can see for different 
cropping systems we are getting different results and from there we can have an idea about 
which o ne is best combination for maintaining or improving the soil quality.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:09 )  
 Now, why some soils get fatigued  or sick more than others. Now, there are 2 important terms 
which we have to understand one is called soil resistance and so il another  is soil resilience. 
So, these are the 2 important terms which defines the functional stability of the soil.  
Now what is soil resistance , soil resistance is basically the ability of a soil to resist change in 
function throughout a disturba nce an d what is soil resilience?  Soil resilience is the ability of a 
soil to recover its previous level of function after a disturbance. So there is a slight difference 
between these 2 terms.  
The first one is the soil resist,  ability of the soil to resist chang e in function throughout a 
disturbance and se cond i s soil resilience is the ability of the soil to recover its previous level 
of function after the disturbance.  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:10 )  
 
So, let us see. So, here you can see in the x axis we are putting  the time in years and suppose 
there are compaction disturbances and as a region  in the y axis we are getting the soil 
function. So, you can see a soil with high resistance will resist any changes due to soil 
distu rbances.  
So, this is a soil with high res istance, but this is a soil with a low resistance and high 
resilience although the soil has low resistance, so, that is why you can see the soil function is 
declining in this zone, but since the soil has high resilience, it can recover to the previous 
level after a certain period of time. So, this is the difference between the soil resistance and 
soil resilience and different level of soil resistance and resilience of a soil.  And here in the third you can see it is a soil with low resistance and low resili ence. So, in this 
condition, not only the declining the soil function, but it cannot recover to its previous 
position  because it has low resilience. So, these are the 3 conditions which we see as a 
response 2 different types of disturbances in the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:35 )  
 
So, with frequent disturbances the soil resilience generally decreases over time. And so, in 
frequent disturbances, yearly disturbances we can see that soil resilience can go down over 
time and it basically explains the decline in organic matter levels of tilled soils from the time 
they were brought into the agricultural production and also cultivation tends to increase the 
rate of organic matter loss in soil primarily by accelerated microbial decomposition and loss 
of physical p rotection. So, this is why there is a continuous decrease of soil resilience over 
time.  (Refer Slide Time: 32:23 )  
 
Now, Lal  in 9097, he has proposed a different methods of soil resilient assessment. So, you 
can see here we can measure it, we can assess  the soil resilience by some qualitative 
observation and also with some quantitative obse rvation.  Now, with some quality 
observation, what are the quality observation ? Like soil properties, ground cover , then  
biomass , water and energy balance. So, these ar e quality observations . 
And under the quantitative observation rate of soil degradation , rate of soil restoration , 
modeling. So, these comes under the quantitative observation for assessing the soil resilience.  
(Refer Slide Time: 33:13 )  
 So, guys, these  are the references I hope that you have now and comprehensive idea about the 
soil quality and soil quality index, how to calculate the soil quality index, how to what are the 
minimum data set for the indicators and then how to score those physical , chemic al and 
biological indicators . After the scoring how we can add that by simple addition or weighted 
addition how to do these weighted additions  by PCA we have discussed.  
So, these are very much used by the soil scientists nowadays for defining the soil qua lity and 
new, new methods are also evolving for determination of soil quality index, please go 
through the available literature in and also you can you can discuss, you can see these 2 
papers and you can have a comprehensive idea about soil quality and soi l quality index.  
So, thank you guys. Let us wrap up this lecture and let us meet in our next lecture and 
continue from there. Thank you very much.  
 