Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture:  30 
Soil Testing  and Soil Fertility  Evaluation  Methods  (Contd.)  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:19 )  
 
Welcome  friends  to this last lecture  of week  6, lecture  number  30. And in this week,  we are 
discussing  about  Soil Testing  and Soil Fertility  Evaluation  Methods.  Now,  in my previous  
lectures  of this week,  we have  discussed  about  soil testing,  the basics  of soil testing,  why we 
do soil testing,  what  are the advantages  of soil testing  and then we have  discussed  about  how 
to do different  types  of plant  analyses , plant  indicate,  you know  plant  based  indication  of 
fertility  status,  plant  nutrition  status,  critical  nutrient  concept .  
And also we have  discussed  about  how to collect  the soil samples , what  are the different  
types  of sampling  designs  and also we have  discussed  about  sample  preparation , sample  
storage , sample  transportation  methods  and we have also discus sed about  how to determine  
soil pH, soil electrical  conductivity  and soil available  nitrogen  and phosphorus , we have  
started  discussing  soil available  potassium,  whic h we are going  to continue  today .  
So, if you remember  that these  available  nutrients  are the indicator  of soil fertility  status  and 
using  these  different  types  of extractants  we measure  the quantity  of different  elements  or 
available  nutrients,  both macro  and micronutrients  in the soil. (Refer  Slide  Time:  01:54)   
 
So, these  are the concepts  which  we are going  to cover  in this lecture.  First of all, we are 
going  to cover  determination  of available  potassium  in soil and then we are going  to discuss  
about  how to measure  the available  iron, copper , zinc and manganese  in soil and then how to 
measu re available  boron  in soil. Then,  we are going  to see how to determine  an important  soil 
feature  that is soil catenation  capacity.  And then finally,  we are going  to learn  how to do soil 
test calibration  and interpretation.   
Now,  these  all are very importan t, apart  from  determination  of pH, EC, organic  matter  and 
available  nitrogen  and phosphorus  these  are also very important  soil fertility  parameters.  And 
we are going  to discuss  in brief  about  different  determination  methods  for these  macro  and 
micronutrien ts.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  03:02)   
 
So, these  are the keywords  of this lecture  Flame  photometer , Micronutrients , Available  
boron , Indicator  plants , DTPA  these  are some  of the keywords  for this lecture.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  03:14 ) 
 
  
Now,  we have  already  started discussing  about  available , determination  of available  
potassium  in soil which  is one of the important  soil macronutrient.  Now,  for determination  of 
available  potassium  in soil we require  two major  nutrients , reagents.  First of all is neutral  
normal  amm onium  acetate  and this is the method  of preparing  the neutral  normal  ammonium  
acetate  please go through  it later if you are interested.   And secondly,  the another  important  reagent  is standard  potassium  solution  for creating  the 
standard  potassium  solution  we need  to dissolve  1.9066  grams  of dried  potassium  chloride  in 
distilled  water  and dilute  to 1 liter and this is basically  1000  ppm potassium  solution  and 100 
ml of this solution  diluted  to 1 liter to produce  a 100 ppm potassium  solution .  
Now, why we require  this? We require  this 100 ppm potassium  solution  to create  different  
standards  for development  of a standard , internal  standard  curve.  Now,  in the flame  
photometer  you know,  for standardizing  the flame  photometer,  we require  some  standard  
solution , standard  potassium  solution.  So, the standard  potassium  solution  will be made  from  
this 100 pm potassium  solution.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  04:48)   
 
  
Now,  this is a flame  photometer  and this is the schematics  of flame  photometer  we can see 
that generally  the sample is being  aspirated  in the atomizer  and there  is a air pump  which,  
generates  the compressed  air and which  supplies  the compressed  air and also the fuel supply,  
compress  fuel supply  in case of flame  photometer  we generally  use LPG  gas and then we you 
know mix the sample  will be mixed  with this air in this mixing  chamber  and it will go to the 
burner  where  the flame  I mean  where  you know  it will it will get the energy  from  the flame  
and this flame  will be generated  by this LPG  gas.  
Now,  after these  molecul es or atoms  will be energized,  then they will release  the 
characteristics,  wavelength  or characteristics  light which  will be focused  through  lens and 
which  will go through  slit and ultimately  we will select  the particular  filter  which  is required  for particular  element  and then it will go to photodetector  and will be for subsequently  
amplified  to LCD  display,  which  will give us the concentration  of potassium.   
So, this is how the flame  photometer  generally  works  and this is the you know  actual  you 
know  imag e of a flame  photometer  and in this flame  photometer  there  is an window  which  is 
called  the flame  view  window.  So, from  this flame  view  window  you can check  the verify  or 
check  the color  of the flame  because  for individual  elements  the color  of the flame  will vary.  
So, this is how this instrument  basically  works.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  06:52)   
 
  
Now,  if we go ahead  and see the procedure  of estimation  of available  potassium,  first of all 
we have  to create  the standard  for potassium  as I have  already  mentioned,  we have  to prepare  
the standard  for potassium  at least 5 and then,  you know,  we have  to prepare  a bulk 1000  ppm 
potassium  solution  which  I have already  discussed,  and then we have  to prepare  100 ppm K 
solution  from  this 100 ppm K solution  will produce  the K solution  of different  strength  like 5 
ppm,  10 ppm,  15 ppm,  20 PPM  and 30 ppm.   
Now,  also I have  told you that we need  to prepare  these  neutral  normal  ammonium  acetate  
solutions . So, after we take these  thing,  after we create  these  standard  from  5, 10, 15, 20 and 
30 ppm,  we need  to first standardize  the flame  photometer  after we standardize  the flame  
photometer  we need  to weigh  5 gram  of soil in 150 ml of conical  flask  and then we have  to 
add this 25 ml of neutral  normal  ammonium  acetate.   So, what  will happen  this ammonium  acetate  will dissociate  to form  the ammonium  ion and 
these  ammonium  ions will replace  the potassium  which  are adsorbed  onto the clay surface,  
and this potassium  will come  into the solution  and subsequently  we will measure  this 
potassium  concentration  in this extracted  solution.   
Now,  once  we add this 25 ml of neutral  normal  ammonium  acetate  solution,  we need  to shake  
it for 5 minutes  and then we need  to filter  it using  Whatman  number  1, and then we need  to 
fit the filtrate  into the atomiz er of flame  photometer  and then finally,  we get the reading  from  
the flame  photometer.  So, this is how we measure  the available  potassium  in the using  the 
flame  photometer.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  08:58 ) 
 
Now, how to interpret  these  results.  So, there  are some certain  calculations  I have  not shown  
that calculation  here,  but the interpretation  is based  on the amount  of potassium  in kg per 
hectare,  we can designate  low medium  and high content  of course,  when  it is less than 120 kg 
we call it a low concentration , when  it is 120 to 280 kg per hectare,  then we call it a medium  
content  and when  it is greater  than 280 kg per hectare,  then we call it a high content.   
Now,  remember  that just like phosphorus  in case of potassium  also we need  to convert  this K 
into K2O. So, for converting  that K to K2O we need  to multiply  with a factor  of 1.2. So, 
using  that factor  1.2 We can we can mult, we can convert  this available  potassium  to 
available  K2O. Generally,  for fertilizer  calculation  we use P2O5 and K2O. So, the 
availability  of the nutrients  are also sometimes  interpreted  in in terms  of available  P2O5  and 
available  K2O. So, this is how we do the interpretation.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  10:16)   
 
  
Next  is the determination  of available  iron, copper,  zinc and manganese.  So, first of all we 
need  to dry and ground  the soil sample  and here for extracting  these  iron, copper , zinc and 
manganese  we will be using  a DTPA  solution.  What  is the full name  of DTP A? DTP A is 
Diethylene  Triamine  Pantacetic  Acid, so it is a chelating  agent  which  will basically  chelate  
all these micronutrients  and then we will measure  the concentration.   
So, here in these  extracting  solution,  it is basically  a mixture  of 0.005  Normal  0.005  Molar  of 
DTPA  then 0.01 Molar  of calcium  chloride  dihydrate  and 0.1 Molar  of trithanolamine . So, we 
have  to dissolve  1.97 gram  of DTPA  and 1.47 grams  of calcium  chloride  dihydrate  and 13.3 
ml of triethanolamine  separately  in distilled  water  and then subsequently  combine  them  and 
the pH of this mixture  should  be adjust ed to 7.3 using  concentrated  HCL  and the volume  
should  be made  up to 1 liter with distilled  water.   
So, this is about  the extracting  solution.  Now,  how to extract  from  the soil. So, first we need  
to weigh  10 gram  of soil and then we need  to add 20 ml of this DTP A extractin g solution  or 
extraction  solution  and then we need  to shake  it for 120 minutes  after that the sample  should  
be filtered  using  the filter  paper.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  12:00 ) 
 
  
Once  you filter  that, then we need  to develop  a multi  you know,  we need  to develop  the we 
need  to include  the multi -element  calibration  standards  for standardizing,  the instrument.  
Now  the instrument  which  we are going  to use for determination  of available  for Fe, Cu, Zn 
and Mn is atomic  absorption  spectra  photo  meter  and the principle  is known  as atomic  
absorption  spectroscopy.   
So, in this atomic  absorption  spectroscopy  to standardize  this instrument,  we decla re multi -
element  calibration  standards  for the following  concentration  what  are those  concentrations  
0.5 ppm,  then 2.5 ppm and 5 ppm of copper  and zinc and then 5 ppm,  25 ppm and 50 ppm of 
manganese  and 25, 50 and 100 ppm of iron.  
So, once  we standardize  this instrument,  all calibration  blanks  and standard  should  be 
prepared  in the DTP A extracting  solution.  Remember  that now,  once  we do that, then we can 
measure  the concentration  of these  four micronutrients  in the extracted  solution  and using  
these  atomic  absorption  spectrophotometers . (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:33 ) 
 
  
Now,  to tell more  about  these  atomic  absorption  spectrophotometers  you know,  in the basic  
principle  of this, AAS  that, these  atomic  absorption  spectroscopy  says that, when  a compound  
is you know  is heated  by producing  the temperature,  it will be producing  the atoms.  Now,  the 
spectra  of the atoms  consist  of different  types of sharp  lines  as you can see here,  these  are the 
sharp  lines  for different  types  of atoms.  Now,  each element  has a characteristic  spectrum.  
And due to sharpness  of this line, there  is little overlap  between  the spectral  lines  of different  
elements.   
So, as a result,  there  is very little interference.  So, this is how these  atomic  absorption  
spectroscop y basically  works.  This is a very important  and widely  accepted  method  and this 
instrument  is being  used for almost  most  of the soil testing  labs for determ ination  of available  
micronutrients  specifically  iron, copper,  manganese  and zinc.   
Now,  remember  one thing  apart  from  these  atomic  absorption  spectrometer  also we can also 
use ICP based  methods . Now,  for more  details  on the ICP based  methods,  you can follow the 
soil science  and technology  course,  which  I have  offered  previously  in the NPTEL  or there  
are plenty  of materials  available  in the website  which  you can utilize  to see the details  of ICP. (Refer  Slide  Time:  15:15 ) 
 
Now,  to discuss  more  about  these  AAS  remember  that here in the AAS  as we first inject  the 
sample  and using  the high temperature  it is converted  into vapor  and this instrument  basically  
measure  absorbance  or the emission  of the atomic  vapor  and the atomic  spectroscopy,  this is 
basically  atomic  spectroscopy.  So, basically  this atomic  spectroscopy  deals  with atoms  and 
Fe 2 plus and Fe 3 plus of course,  here we cannot  measure  the ions in this method.   
So, these  Fe 2 plus and Fe 3 plus cannot  be distinguished  by the AAS  instrument.  So, atomic  
absorption  spectroscopy  can give you the total element  content  only,  it cannot  give you the 
ionic  content.  So, these  is the these  are the basics  of atomic  absorption  spectroscopy.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:22)   
 Now,  I remember  that these  atomic  spectroscopy  is very sensitive  for most  of the elements  
and concentration  at the ppm level  may be routinely  determined  using  flame  atomizat ion 
which  also known  as flame  AAS  or FAAS  apart  from  that, we can also use electro  thermal  
atomization  we use a furnace  called  graphite  furnace  and this technology  is known  as 
GFAAS  or Graphite  Furnace  Atomic  Absorption  Spectroscopy.   
Now,  what  happens  here,  so, in the atomic  graphite  furnace  atomic  absorption  spectroscopy  
using  electro  thermal  atomization  more  higher  temperature  can be generated  than FAAS  now 
FAAS  is good  up to ppm level , however,  using  these  graphite  furnace  atomic  absorption  
spectroscopy  we can go up to parts  per billion  levels,  so, it will be more  accurate.   
So, this is the difference  between  flame  atomic  absorpt ion spectrophotometer  and graphite  
furnace  atomic  absorption  spectrophotometer.  Now,  if you see the absorbance  of you know  
the principle  of AAS  you can you know  that absorbance  is basically  minus  log of It by I0 
where  It is transmitted  radiation  and I0 is the incidence  radiation.   
So, basically  these  atomic  absorption  spectroscop y basically  measure  this absorbance  which  
we can represent  using  this formula.  So, this is how we measure  the atomic  absorption  we 
measure  the available  iron, copper , manganese  and zinc.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:10 ) 
 
  
So, this is the schematics  diagram  of AAS  in this schematic  diagram  it is quite  clear  that there  
is a you know  light source  which  is known  as the Hollow  Cathode  Lamp HCL . So, the 
hollow  cathode  lamp  produces  the light source and then the sample  is being  spirited  and then goes to the nebulizer  and then we inject  air which  is, which  acts as an oxidant  and then it goes 
to the cloud  chamber  where  we inject  the fuel and then it goes to the mix goes to the burner  
and using  the at using  the energy  of the flame  you know  it absorb  the energy  it observed  the 
energy  coming  from  this hollow  cathode  lamp  and then these  atoms . 
Basically  when  the compound  will go to the flame  it will be converted  into atoms  in flame  
and these  atoms  will be absorbing  this energy  which  is generated  by this hollow  cathode  lamp  
and the rest of the energy  will be transmitted  and then it will be going  through  the 
monochromator  and finally,  it will be detected  by the detector  and then amplified  by the 
amplifier  where we can get the final output.   
So, based  on the absorption  of the atoms  we can measure  the concentration  of a particular  
element  and these  HCLs are elements  specific  and then it produce  a specific  energy  which  
can be absorbed  by a specific  element.  So, this is how these  atomic  absorption  spectroscopy  
works.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:00)   
 
  
Now  of the next one is determination  of available  boron.  Now,  boron  occurs  as an anion  in 
soils and is required  by plants  in very small  quantities.  So, the sufficiency  and deficiency  
difference  of boron  is very low. Remember  that water  soluble  boron  estimates  its availability  
to plants.  So, you know,  water  soluble  boron  basically  indicates  the available  boron.   
So, the total boron  in soil generally  varies  from  20 to 200 ppm and available  boron  ranges  
between  0.03 to 12 ppm,  that threshold  value  ranging  from  0.1 to 0.5 ppm,  which  is water  soluble  boron,  and depends  upon  the soil, type, crops  and other  factors.  How  we measure  the 
boron , we measure  or estimate  the boron  using  the Azomethine  H method.   
Generally,  these  Azomethine  H forms  a colored  complex  with H3BO3  in aqueous  media  
what  are the apparatus  we required , we require  spectrophotometer  and also we require  
polypropylene  tube of 10 ml capacity.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:14 )  
 
  
Now,  let us very briefly  discuss  the basics  of spectrophotometry.  Now,  spectro photometry  is 
a scientific  method  based  on the absorption  of light by substa nce and takes  advantage  of the 
Beer-Lambert  law of light absorption.  So, here we know  that the visible  light basically  you 
know  the electromagnetic  spectrum  can be divided  into different  zones  we know  that we can 
go from  the ultraviolet  region  to visible  light region  to infrared  region  and infrared  region  is 
also differentiated  into different  other  zones like near infrared,  mid infrared,  far infrared  and 
so, on.  
Now,  the visible  light generally  you know  goes from  400 nanometers  to 700 nanometers.  
Now,  spectrophotometry  is spectrophotometer  that is a you know  is a meth  is an instrument  
which  basically  use or which  basically  use the Beer -Lambert  law of light absorption,  this is a 
spectrophotometer  let us discuss  it. (Refer  Slide  Time:  22:24)   
 
  
So, this instrument  how it operates.  So, this instrument  allows  light to pass through  cuvette  
containing  a sample  of the solution  which  absorbed  some  of the incoming  beam.  So, here you 
can see these  are cuvettes  which  is containing  some  samples  and then here we are producing  
the incident  light which  is going  through  the monochromator  filter  and then a monochroma tic 
light is going  through  the sample  and then some  amount  will be absorbed  in the rest of the 
amount  will be detected  by the detector.   
So, I0 here is basically  the incident  light and Ib the you know  transmitted  light and d is that 
basically  the width  of the cuvette.  So, the instrument  basically  allows  the light to pass 
through  a cuvette  containing  a sample  of the solution  which  absorbs  some  of the incoming  
beam.   
So, when  the ray of the light of a given  wavelength  and intensity.  So, generally  this is I0 
comes  into the contact  of perpendicularly  with the solution  of a tinted  chemical  compound  
here it is a tinted  chemical  component  of color  chemical  compound,  the compound  will 
absorb  part of the light radiation.   
So, some  amount  of light will be absorbed  which is denoted  by Ia and the remaining  light will 
pass through  which  is Ib will pass through  the solution  and strike  the detector.  So, this 
instrument  basically  works  in this fashion.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  24:00)   
 
 
  
Now,  we know  that Lambert's  law says that absorbance  and path length  are directly  
proportional.  So, the absorbance  that is the amount  of light absorbed  by the solution  is 
directly  proportional  to the path length.  So, if we go back  here the path length  is basically  d 
because  light has to pass this d distance  through  this sample  solution.  So, this is how these  
things  goes and ultimately  the Lambert's  law says that absorbance  and so Lambert's  law says 
that absorbance  and path length  are directly  proportional.  And Beer’s  law says that 
concentration  and absorbance  are directly  proportional  to each other.   
So, when  we combine  the Beer -Lambert  law, the equation  generally  is as follows.  So, we can 
see here I equal  to intensity.  So, I0 is the initial  intensity  or intensity  of the incoming  
radiation  and then mu is the coefficient  of absorption  and x is the depth  in meters.  So, basically  when  we combine  these  two laws together  basically  it says that, that with the 
increasing  concentration  of the solution,  there  will be higher  absorbance  because,  in our in 
this case,  we are making  sure by constant  you know  the d or let me go back  to the previous  
slide.  So, you can see in case of a cuvette  the d is constant,  so, the path length  is a constant.   
So, the concentration  can only you know  the absorbance  can only vary due to changes  in the 
concentration  of the solution  according  to Beer’s  law so, when  you combine  both of them,  we 
call it Beer’s and Lambert’s law and this is the mathematical  form  of these  Beer’s and 
Lambert's  law. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  26:06 ) 
 
  
Now,  what  are the reagents  we use for determination  of boron,  we generally  use distilled  
water , buffer  solution , Azomethine , H reagent,  Calcium  hydroxide  suspensions  0.1 normal  
HCL , calcium  chloride  0.01 Molar  calcium  chloride  and standard  boron  solution.   
So, this is the procedure  we have  to take 1 ml of aliquot  of blank  and dilute  it with B standard  
into 10 ml of polypropylene  tube and following  the and we have  to follow  the rest of these  
things.  So, first we have  to take 1 ml of aliquot  of blank  and dilute  the boron standards  into 
10 ml or polypropylene  tube and 2 ml a buffer  solution  and then we have  to mix them  then 
we have  to add 2 ml of azomethine  H reagent  then mix after 30 minutes,  we have  to read the 
absorbance  at 420 nanometers  on a spectrophotometer .  
This is a monochromatic  radiation  remember  that these  Beer’s  and Lambert’s law applies  
when  there  is a monochromatic  radiation.  So, with the help of the absorbance  reading  of standard  solution  of different  concentration  of boron,  the standard  curve  is drawn  and a factor  
for a concentration  of boron  for one absorbance  is calculated  which  is utilized  to calculate  
boron  in the soils, plant  or water  sample.  So, this is how we measure  the boron . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  27:24)   
 
  
Determination  of soil CEC  basically  these  schematics  shows  the you know,  these  pic you 
know  this this picture  shows  the steps  of determination  of soil CEC.  So, first we take the soil 
and then we saturate  it with ammonium  acetate  and then with a porous  filter  and then when  
this is totally  saturated  with ammonium  we remove  the excess  water  with the water  and then 
once  all the cations  have  been  removed  except  for ammonium,  then we leach  this ammonium  
using  potassium  solution  which  will remove  all the ammonium  and these  ammonium  cation  
and replaced  amm onium  cation  is basically  measured  subsequently  to determine  this soil 
CEC . (Refer  Slide  Time:  28:13 ) 
 
  
Now, how to calibrate  and interpret  the results , we have , we know  now that how to measure  
different  types  of, how to measure  different  types  of differ ent elements,  macro  elements  and 
you know  and also micronutrients , macronutrients,  micronutrients . Now, how to calibrate  or 
interpret  the results.   
Now,  it is the process  of determining  the relationship  between  the crops  and soil that is the 
correlation  of soil test values  with the crop response  from  the calibrated  soil test value  it is 
possible  to predict  the extra  yield  and that will be obtained  from  the addition  of an extra  
amount  of fertilizer.   
So, we have , using  these  calibrations  we can predict  the excess  yield  we can get by addition  
of extra  amount  of fertilizer  and soil test value  should  be calibrated  in each of the soil for 
each of the crop and soil tests calibration  are of two types , one is soil analysis  a correlation  
approach  and critical  soil test level  approach.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  29:18 ) 
 
  
Now,  if we see here,  this graph  basically  shows  that as the soil test values  are continuously  
increasing,  that means  if the native  content  of nutrient  in the soil is already  high.  That will 
give the least increase  of yield  with the fertilizer  application.  Of course,  when  there  is a 
deficiency  then only we apply  fertilizer  that and it will give us the more  response.  However,  
when  there  is a higher  soil test value  that will give the lowest  yield  response  with the 
fertilizer.   
Apart  from  that as we can see you know  how to interpret  the results.  So, you can see there  are 
different  levels  of soil fertility,  very low, low, medium , high and very high and probability  of 
profitable  increase  as you can see, if the soil you know  levels  of soil fertility  is quite  high,  the 
probability  of profitable  increase  with addition  of fertilizer  is quite  less. So, this is basically  
the interpret , calibration  and interpretation.  So, the first one was a calibration  curve  and the 
second  one is the interpretation.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  30:29)   
 
  
So, we can see here that soil test level  if it is high, very high,  so, the relative  supply  of the 
nutrients  from  the soil it will be maximum  will come  from  the soil. So, probability  of increase  
will be less than 5 percent,  if it is high, soil test level  is high then maximum  is the soil and 
minimum  is from  fertilizer.  
So, probability  of increased  5 to 30 percent . So, as we go from  these  relative  supply  of the 
nutrients  from  soil to more  to fertilizer , you can see the probability  of yield  increase  
continuously  goes in you know  goes up and of course,  the soil test level  will go down.  So, 
that means,  the fertilizer  response  to crop will be always  high when  the particular  nutrient  is 
deficient,  when  the nutrient  is already  there  in a sufficient  quantity,  we cannot  expect  to have  
more  yield  increase  with the addition  of fertilizer . (Refer  Slide  Time:  31:37)   
 
Also you can see here interpretation  of the soil test values  high medium  and low and you can 
see fertilizer  nutrient  applied  and percentage  of yield  you can see this is a high soil test level  
curve , this is the medium  soil test level  curve  and this is the you know  low soil test level  
curve.  
So, what  is high, high is the basically  soil test value  where  the probability  of response  to 
additional  fertilizer  is small,  which  is 10 percent . And soil test medium  is the soil test value  
where  the probability  of response  to additional  fertilizer  is moderate  that is 50 percent . And 
soil test flow is the soil test value  where  the probability  of response  to additional  fertilizer  is 
reasonably  high which  is 90 percent . So, this is the difference  between  low, medium  and high 
level  of fertility.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  32:25 ) 
 
  
So, this is also you can remember  that the critical  limits  of different  nutrients  and for different  
crops  are region  specific  and soil specific.  For example,  you can see critical  limits  of 
available  potassium  in soils for different  crops  and soil you can see here in case of rice, 
medium  black,  the critical  limit  of 100 milligrams  per kg and then for red soil it is 75 
milligrams  per kg. For alluvial  it is 190 ppm,  laterite  is 80 ppm,  wheat  alluvial  100 ppm,  
wheat  calcarious  60 ppm,  sorghum  vertisol  335ppm.  So, this calibration  and basically  the 
critica l limits  of these  nutrients  vary from  one crop to another  crop and from  one soil to 
another  soil. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  33:18)   
 So, this is the last topic , there  is an indicator  plant.  So, certain  plants  are susceptible  to 
deficiency  of a specific  plant  nutrient,  and they produce  particular  symptom  which  are 
different  from  other  deficiency  symptoms.  Thus  the deficiency  of that element  can easily  be 
detected.  
So, there  are certain  indicator  plant like for nitrogen,  cauliflower  and cabbage ; phosphorus  
rape seed; for potassium  potato ; for calcium  cauliflower  cabbage ; for magnesium  potato ; for 
iron cauliflower,  cabbage,  potato ; for sodium , sugar , wheat ; for manganese , sugar,  wheat,  
oats, potato ; and for boron,  sunflower.  So, these  are the deficiency  indicator  plants. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  34:03)   
 
  
So, guys,  this marks  the end of this week  6 of lectures  and I hope  that you have  gathered  
some  good  knowledge s for the soil testing  and determination  of different  types  of soil fertility  
parameters  and interpr etation  of those parameters.  We will be discussing  more  about  the 
recommendation  in our upcoming  lectures  or upcoming  weeks.   
But if you have  any queries  regarding  these  lectures  or regarding  these  topics,  please  feel free 
to email  and post your questions  in the forum . And we will start discussing  soil degradation  
and also Land  capability  classification  in our next week  of lectures.  And so if you have  any 
difficulties,  please  let me know.  And also please  go through  different  literature  for gaining  
more  confidence  on for these  different  types  of you know  soil testing  methods . Thank  you, let 
us meet  in our next week.  