Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 38   
Organic Manures, Manufacturing, Properties  and 
Fate of N,  P, K and Micronutrient Fertilizers  (CONTD.)  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:19)  
 
Welcome friends to this t hird lecture of week 8 of NP TEL online certification course of Soil 
Fertility and Fertilizers. In this week, we  are discussing about Organic Manures, 
Manufacturing properties and fate of nitrogen phosphate  and potassium and micronutrient 
fertilizers. So, in our previous lectures of this week, we have discussed about manures, then 
green manur ing we have discussed we have briefly discussed about biofertilizers. In this 
lecture, we are going to cover the following concepts . (Refer Slide Time: 00:57)  
 
These concepts are decomposition and nutrient  release pattern fro m farm yard manure, then 
possible nutrient losses from manure  and then te chniques to improve the farm  yard manure 
composition and then the  reactions of organic manures  in soil and the nutrient deficiencies in 
Indian soil.  So, these are some of the major concepts which we are going to cover first of all, 
we a re going to discuss how these FY M when we apply in the soil that decompose and 
releas e different nutrients through different processes. And then we are going to discuss what 
are the possible ways of nutrient losses from manure  and then what are the reactions of 
organic manures  in soils.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:56)  
 So, if you see the  keywor ds of this lecture, of course, we  are going to discuss on farm yard 
manure . Then we are also going to discuss the fertilizer ratio, fertilizer grade, we are going to 
discuss about conditioners and fillers and what are their uses?  So, we are going to discus s 
them in details.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:21)  
 
So, before we discuss the pattern of nutrient release, when you apply org anic manure  in the 
soil, we should  have an idea about how to decide how much fertilizer we will  need to meet 
the plant requ irement. So, the crop need for nutrients based on climatic parameters as well as 
the in digenous nutrient supply.  
Now, in the indigenous nutrient supply of course, we have to take care of manures , then crop 
residues then the native soil fertility and also the irrigatio n water because some of the 
nutrients are also coming through irrigation water. So, when we consider the climatic 
parameters as well as the indigenous nutrient supply in the soil, then only we can decide the 
inorganic fertilizer which will be required  to meet the crop requirements.  (Refer Slide Time: 03:32)  
 
Now, if you c onsider the decomposition of FYM , the decomposition of FY M can be occur in 
2 different conditions. One is ana erobic condition and other is aerobic condition. Now , in the 
anaerobic conditi on, we generally  see that the decom position of organic matter or FY M is 
also accompanied by some foul smell, which is due to putrefaction.  
Now, putrefaction is basically decomposition of proteinaceous compounds. In the aer obic 
condition of course, the FY M will undergo decay and produce the carbon dioxide and  water 
H2O . Now  the decomposition of FY M when you consider urine is also a very important 
component of FY M as we can remember, now, the urine contain s urea which subsequently 
breakdown to ammonia and lib erate in the air . So, if you see this is the urea when it 
decomposed, it decomposed into the ammonium ion and carbonate ion and these ammonium 
ion basically released into the atmosphere in the form ammonia gas.  (Refer Slide Time: 05:02)  
 
Now, if we see t he competition on nutrients released from the mineralization process of solid 
organic manner, this flowchart will give us an idea about the fate of different nutrients which 
released due to decomposition of FYM or any manure . So, if you consi der the organi c matter 
or manure and then the decomposition process creates the minerals from th ese decompose 
products.  
Now, 1  fraction of those minerals are being uptaken  by the microorganisms, native  
microorganisms which are present in the soil, another fraction  of the minerals will be up taken 
by the plant roots for meeting their nutrient requirement. And another part will undergo 
precipitation or dissolut ion in the form of in the  solid components of the soil and  the rest of 
the part will undergo leaching losses.  
So, t hese are different processes through which these minerals are consumed. Again 
microorganisms will consume a part of the minerals which are released due to decomposition, 
plant roots will absorb or uptake a part of the minerals due to the decomposition proc ess and 
then a part of w ill loss through leaching and another part will be eith er precipitated or 
precipitate in the form of solids and the opposite mechanism of precipitation is dissolution, 
where these minerals will be dissolved from the solid and ultima tely it will come into the soil 
solution. So, this is these are the competition on nutrients the released from the mineralization 
process of soil organic minute soil organic matter . (Refer Slide Time: 07:13)  
 
Now, let us see the reactions of organic manu res in soils . Now, proteins and allied 
compounds undergoes mineralization in gene rally 3 steps, one is Aminization, second is  
Ammonification and third is N itrification. If you remember  the nitrogen discussion which we 
already did in our previous lectures, we have already discussed these processes. Just to  briefly 
recall A minization in the Aminization  process, the protein first convert into pro teose and this 
proteose  will convert into peptone.  From the peptone it converts into peptide and from the 
peptide we will get the amino acids compound and ultimately these amine compounds are 
formed.  
Now, these amine compounds undergo their Ammon ification process by enzymatic 
hydrolysis. Now, due to the enzymatic hydrolysis, ultimately, we will  be seeing the presence 
of Ammonium ion , Ammonia gas and this ammonia gas will r eact with water to produce the 
Ammonium hydroxide which will f urther dissociate to form the A mmonium ion and 
hydro xyl ion. Now, this released Ammonium and due to the A mmoni fication process is also 
subjected to different types of changes, what are those changes, we can see in the next slide.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:45)  
 
So, in the first step, these A mmonium will be reacting will be oxidized to form the nitrite and 
these nitrite and subsequent formation o f protons and 66 kilocalories of energy this is an 
enzymatic oxidatio n and Nitrosomonas is the major bacteria t hat mediates this first reaction . 
In the second reaction subsequently these nitride will be further  oxidized to nitrate and it will 
produce 18 ki localories of energy. So, and this process will be mediated by nitrobacter 
bacteria.  
Now, you should remember that this is a nitrification process, if you remember our nitrogen 
discussion, so, these nitrification during this nitrif ication process, the A mmo nium ion  gets 
converted into nitrate and plants uptake these nitrate ion from t he soil. Now, remember that 
these A mmonium ions can also be absorbed direct ly by the plants for example  in case of rice, 
because in the rice, ther e is no oxidized condition and Ammonium cannot get chance to 
oxidized into nitrate.  
And as a result,  this Ammonium ion  can be absorbed by rice to meet th eir nitrogen demand . 
Also,  this Ammonium ion  can be fixed by lattice of expanding type of clay minerals. So, this 
type of f ixation can  be occurred for A mmonium ion and as a result these . So, these are the 
fates  of Ammonium ions in the soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:45)  
 
Now, let us see the factors affecting decomposition of FYM . First of all, the temperature is 
one of the major factors. S o, with the increase in temperature decomposition becomes faster. 
Hence, the higher the decomposition rate the higher the ir loss of nutrients specifically 
nitro gen. Second  is compactness of heap , if you rememb er, we generally prepared the FY M 
in heap so, h ow compact that heap is also determined that decomposition of FYM . Now, in 
an open and light heap aerobic organism mainly dominates and in the decomposition of 
manure  however, in a compact heap the fermentation is slow, but regular and in this 
condition, t hey are mainly mediated by anaerobic organism s. 
So, we should always prefer a erobic for decomposition or light heap for rapid decomposition. 
Third  important component or third important factor is moisture. So, some amount of 
moisture is needed to hasten th e microbial decomposition. Now, if the moisture leve l is too 
high, it will retard  the fermentation process.  
Fourth  factor is constituents of FYM . Now, the decomposition of manure  depends on the 
presence of soluble nitrogenous matter in the manure . If urin e constituent is higher 
decomposition is rapid because microbial organisms that simulate nitrogen from urine So, 
based on the composition of FYM  also, the decomposition rate of FYM  is also governed.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:37)  
 
Now, if we see the possi ble nutrient losses from manure  between excretion and crop upta ke, 
there are 2  major ways to whi ch the nutrient losses from manure  one is loss due to handling 
that is liquid portion such as  urine and solid portion as cow dung cake. So, during the 
handling proc ess, when there is a loss of nutrient that is also that is a major factor of major 
component of nutrient losses from manure . Second  important way through which nutrients 
can be lost from manure  is lost due to storage. So, during the storage, there are 2 processes 
through which the there is nutrient loss, one is lea ching loss and that is volatiliz ation.  
So, if you see here, when there is excretion from the animal, th ere will be of course,  there will 
be volatilization of ammonia and during the storage proces s, there will be volatilization of 
ammonium and also leaching and runoff of phosphorus , potassium and ammonium duri ng the 
application pro cess also t here will be volatilization loss of ammonia and surface runoff of N , 
P, K, copper zinc and other micronutrie nts and also during the crop also when we apply to the 
soil and crops are growing, they are also can be we can see the loss of nitrate and phosphate 
due to leaching and also loss of nitrogen gas or nitrous oxide into the atmosphere. So, these 
are the possi ble nutrient losses from manure  between excretio n and crop upta ke. (Refer Slide Time: 14:33)  
 
Now, what are the losses dur ing the handling process? So, dung  which is one of the cow  dung 
which is one of the important componen t of (())(14:46) manure is mai nly used as dung  cakes 
and burned as fuel. Beside this a large portion of the cattle excreta is dropped o utside the 
cattle shed when  the animals are grazing on the uncultivated lands. So, that creates the loss of 
this cow dung, which is an important compon ent of the farm  yard manure . Second  most 
important laws during ha ndling is losses of urine.  
Now urine contains , cow urine mainly contains nitrogen and potassium in large portions. 
However, in our country, we have no good method for preservation of cow urin e. In our 
country, most of the cattle sheds have non-cemented  floors and the urine gets soaked into the 
soils of the floors of the cattle shed and the large quantities of nitrogen is lost through the 
formation of gaseous ammonia and these are the reactions . 
So, you can see this is a urea in the urine, which reacts with the water to produce this 
Ammonium carbonate and these A mmonium carbonate reacts with water to produce t hese 
Ammonium hydroxide, these A mmonium hydroxide will fu rther dissociate to form these  
Ammonia and water. So, these A mmonia will release into the atmosphere.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:19)  
 
Second is the losses during preparation and storage. So, cow dung and other farm wastes are 
collected daily, accumulating in open space for  months together  in manure pits, and the 
manure  remains exposed to sun and rain during this period and due to this effect, the nutrients 
are lost in the following ways first of all, through lea ching, so, the nutrients of manure  are 
mainly water soluble and does the agains t easily washed by rainwater.  
So, the leaching loss of nutrients will vary with the surface exposed rainfall intensity and the 
surface slope on which the manure is heap ed. So, if we can construct a roof over the manure 
pit, that can,  that can reduce the le aching  loss because that can prevent the rainfall to  leach all 
the nutrients of the manure. Second  is another way of loss of nutrients during the handling is 
volatilization. So, during  store the urine and dung are decompose d and a considerable amount 
of Ammonia is produced.  
So, the A mmonia combines  with carbonic acid to form A mmonium carbonate and 
bicarbonate which are r elatively unstable and gaseous A mmonia may be readi ly liberated and 
passes into that  atmosphere. So, urea and other nitrogenous  compounds g enerally liberates 
Ammonia we can see here s o, Ammonia reacts with carbonic acid to pro duce Ammonium 
carbonate, these A mmonium carbonate reacts with  the water molecule to produce 
Ammonium hydroxi de and carbonic acid and these Ammonium hydroxide will furthe r 
dissociate to form ammonia which release into the atmosphere and water. So, these are the 2 
processes through which the there are losses of nutrients during the preparation and storage.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:28)  
 
Now, the question comes, how we can imp rove the composition of FYM.  So, we can improve 
or maintain the  composition of a FYM by mainly  generally 3  methods one is storing in a pit. 
Secondly, use in B iogas or Gobar  Gas plant and third is use of chemical preservatives.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:54)  
 
So, if we , we have already discussed the trench method for preparing FYM , so I a m not going 
to further discuss the trench method is the best method for preparation of farmyard manure. 
Another way of maintaining or improving the qu ality of the farm yard manu re is the use of 
chemical preservative. So, to be more effective, these preservatives are added in the cattle 
shed to permit the direct contact with the excreta or urine liquid portion. This has to be done 
because  the loss of nitrogen from urine  starts imm ediately.  So, the commonly used chemical preservatives are gypsum and super phosphate. So, the 
reaction of gypsum with A mmonium carbonate we can see here is as follows. So , it is 
Ammonium carbonate plus gypsum calcium sulfate it will prod uce calcium carbo nate and 
this A mmonium sulfate at thi s reaction will undergo in the moist condition . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:59)  
 
Now, also super phosphate has been also used extensively super phosphate or single super 
phosphate has been used extensively as a manure  preser vative, since ordinary super 
phosphate contains up to 60  percent  gypsum besides monocalcium phosphate. So, this 
ordinary super phosphate or single super phosphate contains both the gypsum as well as 
mono calcium phosphate. So, the reaction of single super phosphate is almost similar to that 
of gypsum, the reaction of super phosphate with Ammonium carbonate can be represented 
here.  
So, this you can see A mmonium carbonate and then these calcium sulfate and mono calcium 
phosphate, which are coming from the sin gle super pho sphate are reacting with these 
Ammonium carbonate to produce this calcium phosphate and thi s Ammonium sulfate and 
this carbon dioxide and water. So, since FYM  gets dry due to high temperature under  tropical 
condition, the use of single super p hosphate or super phosphate could be safely recommended 
as a chemical preservative to decrease the loss of nitrogen. So, this is how we can maintain  
the quality of the farm yard manure . (Refer Slide Time: 21:20)  
 
Now, what is the effect of organic method  on soil properties, we can  classify the effects on 
improvement of soil P hysical properties, improvement of C hemical properti es and 
improvement of B iological activities. So, if we co nsider the improvement of soil P hysical 
properties, that appl ication of or ganic matter  or manure  can improve the soil structure by 
when these manure  or (())(21:50) decomposed , the decomposition product acts as a binding 
agents of the soil particles and thereby they improve the aggregation and ultimately the  soil 
structure. Secon dly, that improve the water holding capacity.  
Since organic matter has huge amount of porosity, they are they can help in holding a huge 
amount of water. So, as a result of the application of organic matter, the water holding 
capacity generally increases , it application of organic matter also improves soil aeration 
because it improves the soil porosity when there is an improvement of soil p orosity that 
improves the air  movement and air e xchange. Fourth one is the reduction of soil loss through 
erosion as th ese organic matter acts as a binding agents to maintain the aggregate stability as 
a result, there is reduction in soil loss through erosion.  
If we consider the improvement of soil chemical properties, by addition of organic matter we 
can see it can supply  essential plant nutrients in balanced ratio, it can slow down the release 
of nutrients and it can also give the high residual value for the subsequent crops. And if we 
consider the improvement of biological activity of course, when you apply the organic m atter 
that stimulates soil flora and fauna.  (Refer Slide Time: 23:34)  
 
Now, let us see the nutrient deficiencies in Indian soil of course, you can see that nitrogen is 
deficient in 228 districts medium in 180 districts and high in only 18 districts. Simi larly, we 
can see that nutrient deficiencies for phosphorus potassium, sulfur, magnesium, zinc, iron and 
boron. So, our soils are deficient in several macro and micronutrients.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:08 ) 
 
So, also we can see, although the fertilizer consum ption is increasing for last 50 years, we can 
see the partial factor productivity that is the kg of the grain per kg of fertilizer application this 
is continuously decreasing. So, we despite the increase of fertilizer,  consumption we are 
seeing the reducti on of partial factor productivity.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:46)  
 
So, to counteract this, we need balanced fertilization. What is balanced fertilization? Balance 
fertilization includes judicious use of chemical fertilizers based on deficient soil nutrients as  
established by soil testing in conjunction with our other sources of plant nutrie nts such as 
organic manure and B io fertilizers, and it uses soil amendments for acidi c or alkaline soils  to 
promote the soil health and its fertility, thereby ensuring avai lability of the nutrients in soils  
to meet the requirement of plant in critical stages of the growth ensuring adequate soil 
humors to improve the physic -chemical and biological properties of the soil. So, balance 
fertilization is the need of this hour and w e should always pro mote this balance fertilization, 
so, that the soil resources can be managed sustainably.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:46)  
 Now, if we see the classification of the fertilizers, here you  can see the fertilizers is S  I am 
using so, do  not get co nfused. So, fertilizers you can use either S and Z  both of them are fine. 
So, the classification of the fertilizers you can see they are either straight fertilizer complex 
fertilizer or mixed fer tilizers. So, what are the straight  fertilizers ? Straight fer tilizers applied 
was only one primary nutrient namely nitrogen , phosphorus , potassium, for example, Urea, 
Ammonium sulfate, Potassium chloride and P otassium sulfate . Potassium chlor ide is also 
known as muriate potash . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:28)  
 
Second is complex fertilizers  complex fertilizers contain 2 or 3  prim ary plant nutrients of 
which 2  primary nutr ients are in chemical combination. So, these fertilizers are usually 
produced in granular form for example, Diammonium phosphate or DAP, Nitro phosphate 
and A mmonium phosphate. Third category is mixed fertilizers. So, mixed fertilizers are 
physical mixtures of state f ertilizers. So, they contain 2 or 3  primary plant nutrients, fertilizer 
and mixture are made by thoroughly mixing the ingredients either mecha nically or manua lly. (Refer Slide Time: 27:07)  
 
Now, the next concept is fertilize r grade, what is fertilizer grade?  Now, fertilizer grade refers 
to the guaran teed percentage of nitrogen P2 O5 and K2O  contained in fertilizer material. So, 
the numbers re presenting the grade  are separated by hyphens that are always stated in the 
sequence N, P2 O5 and K2O , you can see in case of a bag of fertilizer as you can see here 
these type of numbers like 10 hyphen 10 hyphen 10.  
So, that shows the available distance s hows the available nitrogen , the second digit shows the 
available P2O5  percentage and the thir d digit shows the available K2O  percentage. So, if we 
see that, for example, in this level 10  10 10 it means that 100 kg of this fertilizer contains 10  
kg of nitrogen,  10 kg of P2O5 and 10 kg of K2O.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:17)  
 Another term is fertilizer  ratio. So, it refers to the ratio percentage of nitrogen P2O5 and K2O  
in the fertilizer mixture. So, the fertilizer gra de 12 6 6 has a fertilizer ratio of 2 is to 1 is to 1  
another component of fertilizer is filler. So, filler is a weight making material like sand , soil, 
coal powder , et cetera  which is added to the fertilizer ingredients so, as to produce a mixture 
of the desired rate. So, generally we add this coal  powder or sand to make up the weight  
when we physically mix 2 or 3  fertilizer to produce a mix fertilizer gr ade. 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:06)  
 
Another important component of fertilizer is conditioner. So, these low-grade  organic 
materials like peat soil , paddy husk, then groundnut hulls et cetera are added to fertilizer 
mixtures during their preparation to reduce the hygroscopicity and improve the physical 
condition of the fertilizer. So, these are known as conditioners . And neutralizers of residual 
acidity.  So, these materials like dolomite limestone et cetera  are added to the fertilizer 
mixture to counteract the acidity of nitrogenous fertilizer. So, these are some of the important 
terms which are related to the fertilizer guys.  (Refer Slide Time: 29:45)  
 
So, these are some of the references and I hope that you have gathered some important 
information in this lecture. Please let me know if you have any questions. Let us meet in our 
next lecture. Thank you.  