Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture: 37  
Organic Manures, Manufacturing, Properties,  
and Fate of N, P, K and Micronutrient  Fertilizer s (Contd.)  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:32)  
 
Welcome friends to this second lecture of week 8 of this NPTEL online certification course 
of Soil Fertility and Fertilizers. In this week, we are discussing about organic manure s and we 
are also discussing about thei r properties, their fate and different macronutrient  and 
micronutrient fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:47)  
 So, in this 37th lecture, we are going to discuss these following concepts, advantages and 
disadvantages of compost, then green manure , then con centrate organic manures , then soil 
beneficial microorganisms as a link to sustainable agriculture and a very basic overview 
about bio fertilizers. So, these are the concepts which we are going to discuss .  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:12)  
 
Now, in the previous lecture also we have discussed about compost and we are going to we 
are going to continue from there and these are some of the keywords considered organic 
manure , oil cakes , biofertilizer s, Rhizobia , Azotobacter so, these are some of the keywords 
for this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:34)  
 So, guys in our previous lecture we have discussed about composting , composting is a 
process is a microbial mediated process in which organic matter from different sources are 
converted or decomposed into a manure  whic h we can apply to the field so, that it can 
improve not only the soil physical, but also soil biological and chemical properties also and 
thereby increasing the soil productivity as well as fertility.  
We have also discussed the different methods of compos t formation like we have discussed 
about Coimbatore  method, we have discussed about Bangalore  method , we have discussed 
about Indore method of composting and we have also discussed about NADEP method of 
composting. These are the methods , these methods are deferred based on the arrangement of 
layers during the composting process and they are composting time.  
So, now the next question comes to our mind what is the need for composting? Why we 
should go for composting ? Composting is a bulky , compost is a bulky  organic manure just 
like farm  yard manure , however why we nowadays see people are support , people are talking 
about composting process , what is a need for composting?   
Now, the first important need for composting is the rejected biological materials conta in 
complex chemical compounds such as lignin, cellulose, hemicellulose, polysaccharides, 
proteins lipid et cetera  and these complex materials cannot be used as such as resource 
materials. So, they need to be converted into simple inorganic elements as avai lable nutrients 
unless these complex chemical compounds like lignin, cellulose hemicellulose are converted 
into simple inorganic element as available element or available nutrient . Plant cannot grow or  
they cannot be used as a resource material as such.  
So, the materials put into soil without conversion will undergo conversion inside the soil and 
the conversion process takes away all energy and available nutrients from the soil and 
affecting the crop. So, the conversion period is mandatory. So, instead of composting if you 
put into the soil during the conversion process there is some loss. So, in the composting 
process, these loss is minimized and the nutrient contents are maintained.  (Refer Slide Time: 4:43)  
 
And also, there are other advantages like v olume reduction of waste. So, whenever you have 
huge amount of waste, you need to reduce the volume. Composting can help you to reduce 
the volume of the waste. Then final weight of the compost is also very less . Composting 
temperature can kill pathogens, w eed seeds and also the other harmful seeds.  
So, during the composting you  will see that some processes are hypothermic in nature and as 
a result they can kill the pathogen and harmful weed seeds and other seeds . Matured compost 
comes into equilibrium with  the soil. So, when you apply these matured compost in the soil, 
they establish an equilibrium with the soil .  
During composting a number of waste from several sources are blended together as I told you 
that for composting, we require agriculture waste we require soil we require water we require 
cow dung  and several other things. So, you can see that during the composting process waste 
from several sources are basically we are blending together .  
Composting access excellent soil condition and it improves th e soil physical condition is 
nothing but in organic methods , so, when we apply it immensely improve the soil fertility 
properties, soil chemical properties or buffering capacity and also soil physical properties. It 
is a sellable product. So , you can sell it to earn money.  
It improves compost ing can help improving manure  handling and it reduces the risk of 
pollution and it reduces the pathogen and it helps in generating the additional revenue. So, 
these are some of the advantages of composting and how it c an improve the soil fertility and 
productivity.  (Refer Slide Time: 7:06)  
 
Other advantages of compost is compost can suppress the plant diseases and p ests. It can 
reduce or eliminate the need for chemical fertilizers. It can promote higher yields of 
agricultural crops of course, improves the productivity . It facilitate compost can facilitate 
reforestation wetlands restoration and habitat revitalization effort by amending contaminated 
compacted and marginal soils.  
So sometime in the marginal soils we can  apply compost to facilitate the reforestation, 
wetland restoration and habitat revitalization and composting is a cost-effective  way to 
remediate soils contaminated by hazardous waste  and it can remove solids, oil, grease and 
heavy metals from storm  water  runoff.  
It can capture and destroy 99.6  percent  of industrial volatile organic chemicals in 
contaminated air and it can provide cost savings of at least 50  percent  over conventional soil 
water and air pollution remediation technologies wherever applicabl e. So, these are the 
several advantages of compost.  (Refer Slide Time: 8:39)  
 
But at the same time compost is also having several disadvantages what are these? So, first of 
all the product is heavy and bulky and making is expensive to transport. So, if  you consider if 
you considered the chemical fertilizers still as compared to the chemical fertilizers, the 
product is heavy or bulky. So, if we compare the transport of chemical fertilizer and transport 
of compost, of course, compost transporting is expen sive.  
The nutrient value of compost is low compared with that of chemical fertilizer and since it is 
a bulky organic manure  of course, their nutrient value will be low as compared to the 
chemical fertilizers and the rate of nutrient release is slow so tha t it cannot usually meet the 
nutrient requirement of crops in a short time.  
Thus, resulting in some nutrient deficiency. Compost itself cannot usually meet the nutrient 
requirement in a short time. So , that is why for correcting , immediately correcting th e fertility 
or the nutrient deficiency, people generally rely on Chemical fertilizer, the nutrient 
composition of compost is highly variable compared to chemical fertilizers. So, depending on 
different sources, compost are named differently and of course, their composition is also 
different.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:22 )  
 
Another disadvantages agricultural users might have concern regarding potential levels of 
heavy metals and other possible contaminants in compost particularly mixed municipal solid 
waste. So, the potential for contamination becomes an important issue when compost is used 
on food crops. In India, we have seen that when co mposting materials are applied when we 
develop the compost from some dumping sites soil and those composted materials are applied 
to the field that can increase the heavy metal concentration in the soil.  
So, this is one of the major point of concern for compost application specifically the 
municipal  sub those compost which are made from municipal solid waste apart from that long 
term and heavy application of compost to agricultural soils has been found to result in salt, 
nutrient or heavy metal accumulation and may adversely affect plant growth , soil organisms , 
water quality and animal and human health . So, these are some of the disadvantages of 
composting.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:47 )  
 
Another method which we are going to discuss is called Green manuring  method. Now, green 
manuring  can be defined as a growth of a crop for the specific purpose of incorporating it into 
the soi l while green or soon after maturity to improve the soil and benefit the subsequent 
crop.  
So, green maneuvering means when the crop is we generally mix these crops we say we 
generally grow these crops in the field and generally mix them in the soil when t hey are still 
green to improve the soil, physical chemical and biological properties and to benefit the 
subsequent crops. Now, plowing or turning of undecomposed in plant tissues into the soil can 
improve the soil physical condition and fertility.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:55)  
 So, this is how green manure works. Now, the objectives of green manuring are first of all to 
increase the organic matter content in the soil, when you are mixing the plant in the soil, 
remember that all the plant parts these are basi cally composed of different complex organic 
compounds and these organic compounds are like cellulose hemicellulose. So, when we 
incorporate the green manure  in the soil that can increase the organic matter content of the 
soil.  
Secondly, they can maintain and improve the soil structure of course,  that way we add 
organic matter that can  improve the soil structure by  helping in the aggregation process and it 
reduced the loss of nutrients particularly nitrogen it provide a source of nitrogen for the 
falling cr op some of the crops or some of the green maturing crops and known to fix the 
atmospheric nitrogen to biological nitrogen fixation and thereby they improve they provide 
the nitrogen for the subsequent crop and also finally, it can reduce the soil loss by e rosion 
using by adding the organic matter and through their root system. So, these are some of the 
objectives of green manuring.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:35 )  
 
Now, let us see the classification of the green manur ing, the first  category of green manuring  
is green manuring  in situ. So, in this system green manure crops are grown and buried  in the 
same field to green manure to be green -manure d and either as a pure crop or as an intercrop 
with the main crops.  
So, basically in this case we are growing the crop in the field and just before the sowing of 
the next crop, we are incorporating that we are harvesting and incorporating that standing crop in the field to face it and facilitate the decomposition. So, this is called Green manuring 
in situ, so  the most comm on green manure crops grown under these systems are Sunnhemp,  
Daincha or Sesabania and a lso Phaseolus and Guar . So, these are some of the important 
plants which you can grow for in situ green manur ing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:40 ) 
 
Another method is called Greenleaf manuring . Now, the green leaf manuring  refers to the 
turning green leaves and Tinder tweaks collected f rom shrubs and trees grown on bu nds, 
waste land and nearby forest  area into the soil. So, you collect these green leaves and tender 
twigs from the nearby areas and you apply into the field.  
So, the common shrubs and trees are Glyricidia, Karanj et cetera,  plants used as a source of 
green leaf manure or Azolla, then Calotropis, then Cassia, so these are required for green leaf 
manure . So, here  leaf is considered as a major part for manuring . So, these are the 2 major 
categories of green manuring .  (Refer Slide Time: 16:31 )  
 
Now, here you can see green manure crop cover can reduce s the need for mineral fertilizer, 
especially when you grow the pu lses, when you incorporate the pulses as a green manure , so, 
that can incorporate a pulse as a leguminous type of crops which can fix the atmospheric 
nitrogen can reduce the nitrogen requirement in the subsequent crop.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:04 )  
 
So, the se are some of the Greenleaf manure crops like Cass ia, Sesbania, Pongamia, t hen 
Peltophorum , then Azadiracta neem, then Delonix, then Calotropis , then Leucaena 
Leucocephala,  so, these are some of the green manure  crops.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:22 )  
 
Now, let us see the biomass production and Nitrogen  accumulation of green manure crops. 
So, if you see the Sesbania aculeate in 60 days, it can  produce a diameter of 23.2 tons  per 
hectare and it can accumulate huge amount of nitrogen also Sunnhemp  can also inco rporate 
huge amount of nitrogen cow  pea then Pil lipesara, then cluster bean , Sesbania rostrata, all 
these can also incorporate huge amount of nitrogen.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:03 )  
 
If you see the other plant in person bases in Sunhemp content, that is c rotalaria juncea content 
2.3 percent  nitrogen, 0.5 percent  P 2O5 and 1.8  percent  potassium in case of Dhaincha  or 
Sesbania aculeate , it contains 3.5 percent  nitrogen,  0.60 percent  of P 2O5 and 1.20  percent  of K in case of S esbania, it contains 2.71  percent  of nitro gen 0.53 percent  of P2O5 and 2. 21 
percent  of potassium.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:41 ) 
 
So, these are the  green manure and let us now discuss the second most important thing that is 
concentrated organic manure,  we have discussed about the bulk y organic  manure . Now, let us 
discuss about the concentrator organic manure . Now, concentrated organic manure have 
higher nutrient content than bulky organic manures  and the important concentrate organic 
manures  are oil cake blood meal fish manure et cetera.   
These  are also known as organic nitrogen fertilizers. So, for that used by the crop they are 
converted to bacterial action into readily usable ammoniacal nitrogen and nitrate nitrogen and 
these organic fertilizers are there for relatively slow acting, but th ey supply available nitrogen 
for a more extended period. So, let us see what are the  important of concentrator organic 
manure ?  (Refer Slide Time: 19:46 )  
 
Let us first discuss this oil cake. Now , after the oil is extracted from the oil seeds the 
remaining solid portion is dried as a cake which can be used as a manure.  Now, as I have 
already discussed at the beginning the oil cakes  are of 2 types. One is edible oil cakes which 
can be safely fit to the livestock example groundnut cake coconut cake et cetera . The second 
one is non-edible  oil cakes which are not fit for feeding t he livestock. Examples are Cast or 
cake, Neem cake, Mahua cake et cetera.  
Now , remember that both edible and non-edible  oil cakes can be used as manure or however 
edible oil cakes are fe d to cattle and non-edible  oil cakes are used as manure s, especially for 
horticultural crops. Nutrients present in oil cake after mineralization are made available to 
crops 7 to 10 days after application because they have very less CN ratio. So, their 
mine ralization is quite fast . Oil cakes needs to be well powdered before application for even 
distribution and quicker decomposition.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:02)  
 
Now, these are 2 oil cakes, one is groundnut cake and other is mustard cake. These are of 
cours e, as you can see, these are edible oil cakes.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:16 )  
 
Now, let us see the average nutrient content of oil cakes. So, if you can see that among the 
non-edible  oil cake Castor cake contain 4.3  percent  nitrogen 1.8  percent  of P2O5 and 1 .3 
percent  K2O  in case of edible oil cakes you can see coconut cake can contain 3  percent , 
nitrogen  1.9 percent  P2O5 and 1.8  percent  K2O  if we consider the ground nut cake that 
contains 7.3  percent  of nitrogen 1.5  percent  of P2O5 and 1.3  percent  of K2O. So, this is how 
we can see that  in different non-edible  as well as edible oil cakes, how the se nutrient 
concentrations are continuously vary ing.  (Refer Slide Time: 22:05 )  
 
 
Now, apart from these oil cakes, we can also use animal based concentrated  organi c manure  
for example blood meal when dried and powder ed can be used as manures . The meat of dead 
animals is dried also and converted into meat meal, which is a good nitrogen source. These 
are some of the examples of animal based concentrated organic manure s. So, you can see 
horn and h oof meal and also you can see raw bone meal and crushed bone meal. So, these are 
different animal based concentrated organic manures .  (Refer Slide Time: 22:44 )  
 
Now, if we consider the average nutrient content of animal  based concentrated organic 
manure  we can see that in the blood  meal it contained 10 to 12  percent  Nitrogen meat meal 
content highest 10 also 10.5  percent  and so this is the nitrogen and P2O5 and K 2O 
distribution among blood  meal , meat meal, fish meal , horn and hoof meal,  raw bone meal  and 
steamed bone m eal. So, this table basically shows the average nutrient content of animal 
based concentrated organic manure.   
(Refer Slide Time: 23:27 )  
 
Okay guys we have discussed the bulky organic manure as well as con centrated organic  
manures . We have seen the farm  yard manure we have seen the farm  yard manure manufacturing process we have seen composting , composting process and now we have also 
seen the green manure and concentrated organic manure.   
Now, if we consider th e plant growth and development these soil beneficial microorganisms 
play a very important role for plant growth and development it can either fix nitrogen from 
the atmosphere through the process of biological nitrogen fixation, it can help in phosphorus 
solubilization it can also help in bio pesticide formation or bio herbicide formation, it can 
help in organic matter decomposing it can help inorganic matter decomposition and it can 
also suppress biotic and abiotic stress.  
So, you can see that and also b io remediation, which is another very important process. So, 
you can see not only the nitrogen fixation and phosphorus solubilization it can also acts as bio 
pesticide bio herbicide for sustainable pest management and organic matter decomposers so, 
it can al so help these micro microbes can also help for organic matter decomposition 
specifically in case of compost, and also it can suppress biotic and abiotic stresses and 
ultimately it can also help in bio remediation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:18 )  
 
So, that is why bio fertilizers have played a major role in contemporary agriculture. Now, we 
are going to discuss this bio fertilizer very briefly because, in week 9 we are going to discuss 
the bio fertilizer and their prep aration. In details however, we wi ll just ha ve a very brief 
overview of biofertilizers remember that biofertilizers are preparations containing living  cells 
or latent cells of efficient strains of microorganism that help crop plants efficiently uptake 
nutrients by their interaction in the rhizospher e when applied through seed or are in soil.  So, remember one of the major criteria of bio fertilizer is these are living cells or latent  cells 
of efficient strains of microorganisms and we generally apply them through seed or we 
generally apply them in so il. So, that can they can improve the uptake of the nutrients by their 
interaction in the rhizosphere . They accelerate the certain microbial processes in the soil, 
which augment the extent of availability of the nutrients in a form easily assimilated by th e 
plants.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:44 )  
 
So, if you see the broad classification of bio fertilizer, we can see there are nitrogen fixing bio 
fertilizer , phosphate solubilizing bio fertilizer and organic matter decomposers among the 
nitrogen fixing bio fertilizer we can see again they are divided into symbiotic nitrogen 
fixation and non-symbiotic  nitrogen fixation.  
So, these are so, synthetic nitrogen fixation can be seen in nodules and non-nodules  and 
nodules can be seen either in root or stem. So, these ar e the differences there are different 
nitrogen fixing by fertilizer, when we discuss phosphate solubilizing  bio fertilizer, they are of 
2 types one is phosphate mobilisers and another is phosphate solubilizes. So, one help  in 
phosphate mobilizing and other  helps in phosphorus solubilizing. The third category is 
organic matter decomposers.  
So, these decomposers help in  decomposing the organic matter, fast decomposition of organic 
matter and they are of either cellulolytic , cellulolytic by biofertilizers or organ ic matter 
decomposition or lig nolytic organic matter decomposers. So, cellulolytic decomposers basically attacks … cellulolytic microorganisms attack cellulose of the plant cell and 
lignolytic  organic matter decomposers attack the lignin of the plant  cell.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:25 )  
 
Now, if we first see the further categories of microorganisms, which are generally use  as 
fertilizer you can see nitrogen fixing microbes are either symbiotic example is rhizobium.  
Non-symbiotic example Azotobacter, Azosp irillum.  Phosphate solubilizing microorganisms 
like bacillus , pseudomonas . Zinc sol ubilizing, zinc microorganisms Thiobacillus, thioxidans  
and potassium solubilizing microorganisms are you can see Burkholderia Pseudomonas .  
Sulfur oxidizing microbes are alcaligenes, Bacillus x anthobacter.  Bio control microbes are 
bacillus subtilis , Pseudomonas and then ageo bacteri um. So, these are some of  the bio control 
for microbes and finally, phosphate solubilizing microbes  you can see mycorrhizal fungi and 
examples of Glomus , so, these are some of the biofertilizers these are some of the 
microorganisms which generally use as biofertilizers.  
So, guys I hope that the this lecture was useful to generate some important information and 
we have discussed about the advantages  and disadvantages of composting and also we have 
discussed about green maneuvering, concentrate organic manure  their classification , different 
types of concentrate organic manure and also we have discussed about the nutrient content of 
different concentra te organic manures . And finally, we have a very brief overview of 
biofertilizers and we have seen some of the organisms which are which can be used as bio 
fertilizers.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:24)  
 
 
So, these are some of the references guys. So, let us w rap up our lecture today. And we wi ll 
start from here in our next lecture  that is lecture number 38. Till then, goodbye. Thank you 
very much . 
 
 
 