Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 0 3 
Importance of Soil Nutrient Management and Basics Soil -Plant Relationship (Contd.)  
Welcome fri ends to this third lecture of week 1 of NPTEL  online certification course of Soil 
Fertility and Fertilizer. And in this week, we are talking about importance of Soil Nutrient 
Management and Basic Soil-Plant Relationship. So, in our previous two lectures, w e have 
discussed about what is the importance of soil health, what are the indicators of the soil 
health, then we have discussed about what are the different types of laws, which are 
governing the plant nutrition for example, Liebig ’s law of  minimum  we hav e discussed .  
We have also discussed law of diminishing return and also we have discussed the law of 
maximum apart from that, we have also discussed you know, why we call some nutrients as 
essential nutrients, what are the essentiality  criteria of some nut rients, what is the 
classification of those nutrients based on their essentiality as well as the amount required, we 
have also seen what are the major forms, which are available plant available forms of 
different macro and micronutrients.  
So, we have all discussed this thing in our previous lecture, we have also discussed the 
hidden hunger we have discussed the different types of deficiency symptoms a plant can 
produce due to the absence of a particular nutrient or we have also seen some toxicity 
symptoms also.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:55)  
 
Now, in this third lecture, we are going to discuss these following topics  we are going to first 
discuss the Nutrient Cycling and then we are going to discuss Nutrient Retention Mechanism 
in Soil and also, we are going t o discuss Exchangeable Cations  Availability and Nutrient 
Chelation. So, these are the four major concepts which we are going to discuss in this lecture 
number 3 of week 1. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:16)  
 
And these are the key words for this lecture Fertility Indicators, Nutrient Removal, Bonding 
Strength and Metal Chelate  Interactions.  (Refer Slide Time: 02:26)  
 
So, let us start , so, you know that nutrients are very much …  useful for crop production and 
these are the major food for plant and most of the nutri ents plant are getting from the soil and 
raised 3 that is carbon, hydrogen and oxygen they are getting from air and water. So, these 
are known as CHO are known as the structural elements apart from that the essential 
elements both macronutrients and micron utrients they are again they are getting it from the 
soil itself.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:07)  
 
Now,  what is Nutrient Cycling? Now, Nutrient Cycling basically is the dynamic interaction 
between different phases of soil to modify or transfer  the plant essent ial nutrients from one form to another form. So, this is called nutrient cycling, nutrient cycling basically gives us the 
indication of how a nutrient is getting circulated among this soil environment. And so, this 
nutrient cycling can be assessed by measu ring the following indicators.  
So, first one is the Fertility Indicators. So, this fertility indicators includes mineral nitrogen as 
well as potentially mineraliz able nitrogen, then soil nitrate , soil test phosphorus , then 
potassium then sulfur, then calc ium then magnesium then boron , zinc and copper apart from 
that also soil salinity. So, it does  not matter whether a soil is having high amount of these 
essential nutrients, if the soil is aligned , soil will become physiologically dry that means, in 
this co ndition in a saline soil  condition plant cannot extract these nutrients from the soil.  
Second category is , Organic Matter Indicators for example, CN ratio decomposition, 
microbial biomass carbon particulate organic matter soil enzymes, soil organic matter , total 
organic carbon and total organic matter all these are different organic matter indicators and 
organic matter you know it plays a major role in nutrient cycling in the soil .  
Apart from that soil reaction indicators said they  are like soil pH. So, so il pH is known as the 
one of the important soil property which governs the availability of different nutrients to the 
plants. So, soil pH is another important of nutrient cycling.   
(Refer Slide Time: 05:20)  
 
Now, what are the ways through which soil can g ains nutrients, what are the different inputs 
of nutrients plant nutrients in soil. So, you can see here I have given five different inputs first of all atmospheric deposition, which is basically which refers to the nutrient that are 
deposited on land and water from  the air. 
So, due to rainfall, you know and due to different types of atmospheric events, when different 
nutrients are coming into the soil then it is called atmospheric deposition. Second one is 
biological fixation , biological fixation is the co nversion of biologically unavailable  
atmospheric nutrient to plant available form , we are going to discuss this biological nitrogen 
fixation in our upcoming lectures in details. So, nitrogen is one of the major plant nutrient  
which gets biologically fixed by many different microorganisms and helps to increase th e 
fertility status of the soil.  
Third one is Application of synthetic fertilizers. So, synthetic fertilizer are applied to 
agricultural soils to increase the crop yields and quality. So, this is anot her major source of 
nutrients in the soil. Then, FYM  and manures and other manures , these are the by-products  of 
different livestock production as an excellent source of nutrients for crop production. So, 
these are also you know, different sources for a nu trients in the soil.  
And finally, plant residues crop residues contain significant quantities of nutrients that are 
returned to the soil. So, these plant residues are also very much important for as a source of 
nutrients in the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0 7:23)  
 
So, we have seen the nutrient inputs let us discuss what are the ways through which nutrient 
gets removed from soil.  Now, the first important thing is crop uptake and removal of nutrients from soil , now you know that nutrient  used by plants are tak en up in soluble 
inorganic free ions ionic  forms from the soil solution and are removed from the soil when the 
harvested materials are you know are removed from the field. So, this is called crop uptake 
and as a result the nutrients are getting removed fro m the soil.  
The second important way through which nutrients are removed from the soil is called the 
runoff, this is basically loss of dissolved nutrients in water moving across the soil surface. So, 
there are different you know reason for runoff and ther e are different types of cultural 
practices, which we can follow to reduce the nutrient loss through runoff.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:31)  
 
The third important you know pathway of nutrient loss from soil  is Erosion that is a loss of 
nutrients from fields by w ind or water movement. So, it could be wind erosion  it could be 
water erosion.  The fourth  pathway is the leaching which is basically loss of dissolved 
nutrients in water that moves down to the soil to groundwater or out of the field through drain 
lines.  
The fifth one is gaseous losses to the atmosphere, it primarily you know primarily nutrient 
losses through gaseous form can be seen in different nitrogen in the different forms of 
nitrogen t hrough  volatilisation and denitrification. We are going to discuss these two terms in 
details in our upcoming lectures. So, these gaseous losses to the atmosphere is another 
important pathway for nutrient removal from soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 09:30)  
 
So, for example here you can see this is a wetland condition and of c ourse, in this soil this is 
an anaerobic condition because there is a standing water when there is an anaerobic condition 
these nitrates or the oxidized form of  nitrogen can cannot be present and as a result they are 
going they are reduced to at you know this nitrogen  gaseous form  and released to the 
atmosphere. So, this process is known as the denitrification process.  
So, this is one of the way through which these nitrogen from is lost from the soil. So, this is 
denitrification process, we are going to di scuss this denitrification  process in more details in 
our upcoming lectures.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:20)  
 Now, in addition to the variety of inputs and outputs, plant nutrients exist in many different 
forms or nutrient pools in the soil. For example, nitrog en can remain in different pools 
phosphorus can remain in different pools in the soil and these phosphorus and you know 
potassium can remain in different pools in the soil like a you know soil solution potash, then 
exchangeable potassium, non-exchangeable  potassium, structural potassium .  
We are going to discuss this in details in our upcoming lectures, but remember that these 
nutrients or the available forms of the nutrients are there in the soil in different pools and 
individual pools basically, they cont ribute to contribute these nutrients to the to the soil 
solution from which the plants uptake these nutrient through their roots.  
So, here you can see how you know different mechanisms are involved for contributing these 
ions to the soil solution like cation exchange , surface adsorption and from soil minerals from 
the soil organisms and organic matter. So, all these different types of you know, processes are 
contributing these nutrients in the soil solution from which plant root uptake these nutrients.  
So, that shows that dynamic interaction between different pools and different processes, 
which are going on in the soil in different phases like mineral phase … then organic matter 
phase and you know soil solution phase, which are ultimately governing the upta ke of the 
nutrients by the plant root.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:16)  
 
Now, here in this picture, we can see the different ways through which the nutrients are 
getting removed from the soil here you can see you know the soil from here, the plant uptake the nut rients and creates the biomass. Now, this biomass  not only the plant, but also the 
animal residue also. So, when they decompose they lead you know to the littering process 
they create the letter and also there are two inputs like through rainfall, atmosphe ric 
deposition we have discussed and also through weathering of the parent rock .  
So, weathering of the parent rock  enriches the soil with different nutrients and also when 
there is a l itter formation, rainfall can add also different nutrients in the l itter. So, these are 
different processes through which these nutrients move from soil to biomass and later, 
ultimately you can see there are two pathways to removal for removal of nutrients, you can 
see here, this is surface runoff from this litter and also le aching loss from the soil.  
So, this basically takes a snapshot of different gains and losses of nutrients from the soil, here 
we can see the soil is gaining the nutrients from the weathering  of the parent rock litter is 
getting the nutrient from the rainf all and also this from the soil this biomass is generating 
these biomass consists of both plant as well as animals and they create the litter  and after that, 
you know simultaneously there are surface runoff and also leaching to which nutrients are 
moved or  removed from the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:05)  
 
Now, how soil … Now, next question comes to our mind how soil retains nutrients ? Now, the 
catenation capacity of a soil is majorly responsible for holding those nutrients to the soil 
surface . Now, what is  catenation capacity ? Catenation capacity of a soil is a measure of the 
quantity of the negatively charged sites on soil surfaces that can retain positively charged ions 
like cations  such as calcium, magnesium and potassium by electrostatic forces.  So, it  is basically the ability of the soil to attract this positive charge cat ions through 
electrostatic  forces. Now , cation  can attach to the sides and detach again in exchange for 
other  cations.  Generally,  CEC expressed as milliequivalents of charge per 100 g rams  of soil. 
So, the unit is mil li equivalent for 100 gram or sometimes we also express the CEC  as 
centimole  per kg.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:19)  
 
Now, if you see that, how these nutrients are moved from soil to root. So, here you can see 
these nutrients ar e which are attached to the clay particles they are getting exchange at these 
root surface and these root hairs are also absorbing these nutrients. So, here you can see these 
nutrient ions move from soil solution into the plant roots and replenished from r eserve in soil 
solids  and on soil surface.  
So, what happens, these nutrients are going moving and migrating from the soil surface to the 
root surface where they  are getting the absorbs and absorbed and the soil is basically , that is 
basically considered a s a reserve d of nutrients, the soil solids, so soil solids here is acting as a 
reserve of these nutrients, which generally replenish these nutrients into the soil solution once 
they are you know, they are uptake , uptake and by the plant root.  (Refer Slide  Time: 16:31)  
 
So, cations  retain electrostatically are easily exchangeable with cations  in the soil solution. 
So, as a soil with higher catenation capacity has a greater capacity to maintain adequate 
quantities of calcium magnesium and potassium and then  a soil with the low catenation 
capacity.  
So, a soil with higher catenation capacity may not necessarily be more fertile because a soils 
catenation capacity can also be occupied by acid catalysts such as hydrogen and aluminium, 
we have to be very very careful because hydrogen and aluminium these are also cations  but 
these are these are not beneficial for the plant, rather they  are toxic for the plant.  
So, when we are calculating the catenation capacity, they are also involved in this calculation . 
However,  they cannot be you know, if a soil is rich with hydrogen and aluminium we cannot 
consider that soil is a fertile because that will impact the crop negatively . However, when 
combined with other measures  of soil fertility, CEC  is a good indicator of soil qu ality and 
productivity. So, in general, we consider CEC as a good indicator of soil quality and 
productivity.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:59)  
 
So, the cat ion exchange  sites are found primarily on clay minerals and organic matter 
surfaces. So, you know that th e soil generally develops this negative charge due to 
isomorphous substitution and at the same time, they also sometimes develop negative charge 
due to due to variable charg e pH dependent charge and organic matter develops huge amount 
of negative charge. S o, this negative charge  are responsible for attracting th is cation.   
So, catenation capacity you know can be attributed to the negative charge develop in both the 
clay minerals as well as soil organic matter. Now,  soil organic matter will develop a greater  
catenation capacity at near neutral pH then under acidic condition, so it is because it is a pH 
dependency C EC entirely the C EC which develops in soil organic matter is a pH dependent 
or variable charge -based  CEC, thus addition of an organic material will  likely to increase the 
soils C EC over time. So, that is why we generally recommend that you add organic matter in 
a non-infertile  you know … non-fertile  soil so, that the fertility of the soil can be enriched.  
So basically,  we are trying to increase the cation exchange  capacity of the soil so, that the soil 
can retain these nutrients for plant growth. On the other hand,  is soil C EC can decrease with 
time as well through different prices like natural or fertilizer induced acidification and also 
through orga nic matter decomposition. So, these are some of the ways through which the 
catenation capacity can also decrease in the s oil. (Refer Slide Time: 19:55)  
 
Now, enter the term is there that is called anion exchange  capacity , anion exchange  capacity 
is the s um of total exchangeable anion  that a soil can a dsorb, the magnitude of CEC in  soil is 
usually greater than an anion  capacity and soils will lacking the ability to retain anion  nitrate 
sulphate  can leach readily and in no longer and is no longer available to support the plant 
growth.  
So, that is why these nitrate is very much susceptible to runoff loss because when they you 
know they are very soluble and when we apply the water in the field these nitrates get 
removed from the soil through th e runoff  proces s, because if there is you know low anion 
exchange  capacity, these anions like nitrates and sulphates  will not be attached to the to the 
clay surface and as a result, there will be repulsion and they will move freely through water 
from one field to another  fleet and ultimately to the water body.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:07)  
 
Now, what are the exchangeable cations  in field soils ? So, the exchangeable ions in the fields 
in the soils depend upon the climatic condition of course, so iron 3 plus Al 3  plus and 
complex aluminium  hydroxyions and H plus are most prominent in humid regions, because 
in the humid regions, these ions generally forms and in the humid region there is generally 
we call it an acidic environment, where we can see the dominance of these iron a luminium 
ions, on contrary calcium , magnesium and sodium dominate  in soil or low in soil of low 
rainfall areas.  
So, when there is an arid or semi -arid condition, you  will see that these soils are rich in 
calcium, magnesium and sodium , in a given soil the proportion of the cation exchange  
capacity satisfied by a particular cation is  termed, the saturation percentage for that particular . 
So, if 50  percent  of the catenation capacity is satisfied by calcium ions, the exchange  
complex is sa id to have a calcium saturation percentage of 50.  
So, this … why this terminology is important ? So, this terminology is especially useful in 
identifying the relative proportion of nutrition  of sources of acidity and alkalinity in the soil 
solution. So, based on these saturatio n percentage, we can calculate we can have an idea 
about the relative dominance of a particular cation  in the soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 22:55)  
 
So, what are the different types of bonding strength of cation,  so cations  which have higher 
bonding strength r emains on the action sites more strongly, which release into the soil water 
solution less easily than others. So , if you see here, different cations  and they  are like 
hydrogen, aluminium, calcium, magnesium, potassium, ammonium and sodium, among 
these, the se are the strongly bound cations  like hydrogen, aluminium .  
And sodium, ammonium, potassium are weakly bound cations,  among this sodium  is the 
weakest showing the weakest bonding strength. However, in case of hydrogen, it shows the 
strongest bonding stren gth. So, this bond strength also plays an important role for nutrient 
cycling and nutrient movement inside soil.   (Refer Slide Time: 23:48)  
 
So, if two cations  are present in soil in equal numbers, one that bonds most strongly will be 
adsorbed others wil l be leached out and weakly held cations  are readily available generally 
for plant uptake.  So, these are the implication of the bond strength of different catalysts in the 
soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:13)  
 
So, this is the let us discuss what is what are Chelates?  So, chelates are you know, remember 
that some nutrients bond with some soluble organic compounds in soil to form ring 
complexes, and these ring complexes are known as chelates . So, these chelates  come from the 
term chila  or chela, which means claw . So basically, these organic compounds are basically forming a claw like complex where they are bound… where they are binding a particular 
nutrient and that is why the total you know  the total structure is known as the chelate .  
So, chelation increases th e solubility of the nutrients preventing the formation of the insoluble 
precipitates and decreases the toxicity of some micro nutrients. So, this is how these you 
know these chelates are very much important for plant nutrition. Now, chelation increases the  
availability of the nutrients to the plants in soil chelated minerals are absorbed more rapidly 
by both plant roots and leaves and this faster nutrient transfer results in accelerated growth.  
So, chelates , metal chelates are always helpful for plant grow th, because they increase the 
solubility of the nutrients and they prevent the formation of the insoluble precipitates and also 
the decrease , the toxicities of the some micronutrients. So, all those chelated  nutrients may 
not be immediately available, they  are mobile and can quickly convert to plant available 
forms near the root surface.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:11)  
 
So, here you can see this is a chelate  which is basically showing these Ethylenediamine  
ligand chelating  to a metal with t wo bonds.  So, here in the chelate  the inorganic part or sorry 
the organic part is known as the ligand and here you can see how they are they are you know 
chelating  to a metal with the two bonds. So, here this is the ethylenediamine ligand and 
ultimately,  they are making a chela te with a with a metal ion. (Refer Slide Time: 26:55)  
 
And this is how these chelates  helps in plant nutrition you can see the soil particles you know 
in the soil particles these cations  are adsorbed and when these  EDD HA who is basically it is a 
chelatin g agent. So, this chelating agent basically forms a chelate  that is FeE DDHA and 
ultimately reaches in the near the plant root and from where plant uptakes these iron for their 
growth.  
So, these roots basically uptake these nutrients for their growth and t hen there is a further 
movement of the EDDHA  from the plant root to the soil particle  surface. So, here you can see 
a gradient of EDDHA from plant root to the soil particle surface however, the F eEDDHA 
which is a metal essential metal you know chelate thei r gradient is from the soil particles to 
the plant root.  
So, this is how these metals are getting bounded by these different you know ligands from 
these chelating agents forming a chelate  and ultimately goes to the plant root and releasing 
these  particula r essential elements for their uptake and then again gets back to the soil 
particles for further chelation  
And in this selection process, there are different types of you know processes also can occur 
like adsorption then bleaching of these Fe EDDHA  and als o there are some cation  
displacement can also occur.  So, there are different types of processes which are going on in 
this chelate  movement from soil to plant root.  So, we have discussed some of the important concepts today, we have discussed the 
indicator s of nutrient cycling, we have discussed the cation exchange  capacity, we have also 
discussed the chelates which are important source of plant nutrition. And I hope that you have 
learned something new. Let us wrap up this lecture here. And in the next lect ure. We  will 
start from here, and we  will you know, we  will discuss some more important  issues related to 
the plant nutrition.  Thank you . 