Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Prof. S omsubhra Cha kraborty  
Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture No. 31 
Soil Health and Quality, Problem Soil, Land Capability Classification   
Welcome friends . I hope t hat you are doing good and today we are going to start a new week , 
week 7, of this NPT L online certification course of Soil Fertility and Fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0 0:32) 
 
And in this week, we are going to discuss Soil Health and Quality , Problem Solve and Land 
capability classification.   
So, in this lecture , lecture  number 31, we are going to recall some of the concepts of soil 
health and soil health indicators, which will be required for better understanding of soil 
degradation and how this soil d egradation is impacting the, soil fertility. We are going to 
discuss those.   (Refer Slide Time: 0 1:27) 
 
So, these are the concepts which we are going to discuss in this lecture. First of all, we are 
going to discuss soil functions. Then we are going to talk about soil stress and related 
degradation processes. And then we are going to discuss about soil health and its 
measurement.  It will  be kind of recall which you have already discussed previously. And 
then we are going to discuss, Role of  soil testing  on soil health. And finally, we are going to 
discuss soil test values for soil health assessment.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0 2:06) 
 
Now, if we see some of the keywords for this  lecture  Pedology , Soil degradation, Soil health, 
Soil testing, Soil health assessme nt. So, these are some of the keywords for this lecture.   (Refer Slide Time: 0 2:23) 
 
So, we all know that soils have unique physical, chemical and biological properties, which 
are important to  and also, they  are very much important. What are those? They are maybe soil 
colour , soil, texture, soil structure, soil consist soil, plant roots, soil  pores, and other features. 
We need to remember that soil is a natural body of solids, liquids and gases with either 
horizon  or layers or the ability to support roote d plants.   
So, we already know from the definition of the soil, that it is an interface between 
hydrosphere, lithosphere, atmosphere and biosphere. And when we talk about Pedology, 
which is a study of soil origin and classification, it is a unique discipli ne, which describe how 
a soil is formed and how different characteristics of a soil can be used to distinguish it from 
other soils and identify its position in the ecosystem. So, the major crux of the slide is soils 
are unique and they have unique properti es. And these unique properties are required for 
supporting the plants in the earth.  (Refer Slide Time: 0 4:15) 
 
Now, what are the major functions of soil? First of all, soil can sustain plant and animal life 
below and above the surface. We know that it can regulate and partition water and s olute 
flow.  So, when there is a rainfall, the soil will determine how much will be infiltrated and 
how much will be lost to runoff. Also, soil can impact, the ecosystem by filtering buffering, 
degrading, and immobilizi ng and detoxifying  some of the pollutants .  
It can store and cycle nutrients. We have already know that how these macro and 
micronutrients like Ni trogen, Phosphorus , Potassium  then Calcium , Magnesium,  Sulphur  and 
different micronutrients continuously revol ves in different forms within the soil and other 
parts of the ecosystem. And finally soil gives the support to the structures.  So, from the 
biological to structural functions, soil can provide our soil offers a huge amount of ecosystem 
services.  (Refer S lide Time: 0 5:59) 
 
Now that is why soil is very much important.  So, the question comes in our mind, why do we 
concern for soil . Leonardo  DaVinci said, the famous painters said that why do we know more 
about distant celestial objects than we do about the g round beneath our feet?  So, see, couple 
of hundred years ago, people also realized the importance of soil for maintaining the 
ecosystem.   
American president Franklin Roosevelt once said that a nation that destroys its soil destroys 
itself.  So, that clearl y highlights the importance of soil in sustaining the nature.  So, this is 
why soil is one of the most important natural resources.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0 6:55) 
 And one more thing is thousand years are required to develop 25 millimetre  of surface soil 
from parent materials through natural processes.  So, the soil formation is a very, very slow 
process. And however, the soil degradation can  remove the soil or can destroy the soil within 
a very short period of time.  So, that is why that makes , that shows more, I mean, that shows 
the more importance of soil for and also that highlights the need for conserving the soil 
resources.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0 7:52) 
 
Now, what is good soil? What is bad soil? Now it is one of the most differentiation factor 
between survival  and extension of most land based life. If the soil is continuously degraded, a 
time will come that that will impact the civilization, which you already know.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0 8:17) 
 Archaeological  evidence su ggest  that soil degradation was responsibl e for extinction or 
collapse of this 3 major civilization Harappan  civilization in Western India, Mesopotamia in 
Asia minor and Mayan culture in central America.  So, these are the 3 major civilization 
which were supposed to be destroyed by, which are suppo sed to be destroyed by,  land 
degradation.   
(Refer Slide Time: 0 8:54) 
 
So, why soil is very important. Another reason for soil important, another reason for realizing 
the soil,  importance of soil is soil access, both source and sink. As far as the carbon i s 
concerned, it contains 3.3 times of carbon than atmospheric pool.  So, soil contains huge 
amount of carbon, more than atmosphere. That is why in the, in the current scenario of global 
warming soil takes an important role.   (Refer Slide Time: 0 9:41) 
 
Now, that is why we must reckon with the rising demand for food due to further growth of 
income and shifts in diet to more animal -based  consumption that will require higher food and 
feed production to achieve the same nutritional values and a large backlog o f unmet 
requirements for food just 13 percent . So, these are some of the important points we should 
consider while discussing the importance of soil and discussing the ill effects of land 
degradation.   
(Refer Slide Time: 10:32) 
 
So, what are the common an thropogenic stresses on soil? There are 4 major common 
anthropogenic stresses on soil. First one is agricultural operations , second is deforestation , third is warfare and fourth one is natural calamity.  So, anyone of these 4 anthropogenic 
stresses can caus e soil degradation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:06) 
 
Now, what is soil degradation? Soil degradation is basically the loss of actual or potential 
productivity or utility due to natural or anthropogenic factors . When soil losses, it's 
productivity or utility du e to different types of natural and anthropogenic factors, then we call 
it a soil degradation.   
What are the, what is soil productivity? We already know soil productivity is the ability of 
the soil to produce the crop build in terms of economic yield.  So, soil degradation leads 
towards actual or potential product , leads towards declining productivity of the soil due to 
mainly anthropogenic factors.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:10) 
 
Now, if we see the stress and different types of degradation processes, if ther e is a stress of 
traffic load, it will create the structural decline. If there is a poor drain that will create soil 
wetness, if there is intensive cropping that will create nutrient and organic matter depletion. 
And finally, when we go for use of agrochem icals and monoculture setting that can lead to, 
biological  degradation and loss in soil biodiversity.   
So, to maintain the soil diversity biodiversity use of synthetic agrochemicals should be 
minimized. And also we should, follow the crop rotation to maint ain the soil biodiversity.  Of 
course, when there is an intensive cropping that also can create nutrient and organ ic matter  
depletion, because there are some high, this nutrient will be  up taken  by the plants and due to 
the crop  removal , these nutrient wil l be lost from the soil. And also the organic matter will be 
oxidized and there will be depletion of organic matter.  So, these are different types of stresses 
due to different types of anthropogenic processes.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:42) 
 
Now, if we see t he soil degradation, the soil degradation can be  divided into different 
processes, factors, and causes.  So, the processes could be either physical, chemical, or 
biological and factors of soil degradation can be classified into soil factors, climate factors , 
terrain  factors, and vegetation factors . Among the causes of soil degradation of course, there 
are some biophysical reason there are socio economic reason. And of course,  there are some 
political reason s also. So, this schematic  diagram, or I would say i t is this flow chart basically 
shows the snapshot of soil degradation process.   
(Refer Slide Time: 14:53) 
 
So, if we go ahead and see the global soil degradation,  So, this is quite clear that in different 
countries, we can see a huge amount of soil degrad ation are going on, including the US, Southern America in Africa, in Asia, in Europe, as well as in Australia also.  So, this red 
colour, shows  the very degraded soil.  So, you can see in India also the considerable part, if 
Western and, in central India, we  can see very degraded  soil and also some amount of soil are 
without vegetation or stable.   
So, this is the global scenario of, soil  degradation. Of course, this data is, quite  old. It is 1997 
data. However, the soil degradation has been increasing since t hen. And right now,  the soil 
degradation process has increased, the  soil degradation has increased, in  the global scale.   
(Refer Slide Time: 16:18) 
 
So, also this, map  shows th e human induced land degradation, these red patch, this, brown  
patch shows stro ng human induced land degradation. These rate patches  are showing light 
human induced land degradation. And these yellow patches are showing strong deterioration 
under low pressure and yellow patches shows light deterioration under low pressure. And 
these green patches are shown, showing the stable or improvement under low pressure.   
So, we can see in India, Indian subcontinent, as well as in some parts of China, in some parts 
of, Asia, Africa, south America and north America, we can see strong human induce d land 
degradation.  So, that shows the anthropogenic impact on land degradation.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:19) 
 
If you see the status of soil degradation in India, this is, there were different types of 
degradation, like wind water erosion , wind erosion , chemical deterioration  and physical 
deterior ation.  So, water erosion  accounts for 155.2 million  hectare , which is 47.2  percent  of 
the total area, wind erosion  accounts for 13 million hectare, which is 4.2  percent  of the total 
area, chemical d eterio ration accounts for 14.9  percent  of the total of, million hector, which is 
4.5 percent  of the total area and physical deterioration accounts for 16.3 million hector, which 
is 4.9  percent  of the total area.   
(Refer Slide Time: 18:04) 
 
Also, if you see the relations hip between soil degradation and production, crop production, 
we can see that our soil productivity, we can see there are 3 different phases, phase 1, phase 2 and phase 3, when soil degradation goes from phase 1 to phase 2 to phase 3, of course there is 
decrease in production or soil productivity.   
(Refer Slide Time: 18:30) 
 
So, what is the goal as a scientist or as a soil scientist or environmental scientist would be, 
our goal will be to identify the best management practice for sustainable crop productio n and 
to allow a farmer or land manager to know in which direction the soil is going the for better 
or for worse.  So, we have to quantify your soil or our soil . So, that we can identify the present 
status of the soil and the future direction in which  the soil is going.   
(Refer Slide Time: 19:15) 
 
So, now the next important thing is what is soil health?  It will  be kind of recap. We already 
know what is soil health. It is a continued capacity of his soil to function as a vital living ecosystem that sustains  plant animals and humans. This definition was given by Natural 
Resources Conservation Service of USD in the year 2015. Of course, soil health is an 
interplay between biological properties, physical properties, as well as chemical properties of 
the soil.   
(Refer Slide Time: 19:51) 
 
So, how to measure the soil health. We know that soil health is governed by several physical, 
chemical and biological attributes and process, and it is exp ressed by different quantitative 
and qualitative measures of these attri butes and outcomes governed by the soil, such as 
productivity, nutrient , water use , efficiency and quality of produce , we already have 
discussed this in our previous lectures.   
So, if we see the soil health indicators, there are physical environment, ecolo gical 
environment, organic matter, and as well as the chemical environment.  So, not only the 
physical, not only the chemical, but also biological and organic matter plays an important role 
for maintaining the soil health.   (Refer Slide Time: 20:45) 
 
So, if you see the relationship between soil health, soil function and its indicators, it will be 
quite clear that when you talk about the soil functions like biodiversity and production, these 
are indicated by organic Ni trogen , organic Carbon pH, then alumini um basis, electrical 
conductivity, crust  roots restricting layers, then erosion, sedimentation,  plant available water, 
wind speed, and density.   
When you talk about water and solid flow, it is indicated by T illage aggregate stability, earth 
worms, porosit ies, structure and bu lk density. When you talk about filtering and buffering, it 
is determine d by Ba sal respiration, organic carbon texture, microbial biomass, Catenation, 
capacity, chemical loading herbicide residues.  
When you talk about when the soil fu nction is basically nutrient cycle, that is d etermined by 
this indicators like organic Carbo Nit rogen , Catenation  capacity, battle respiration, microbial, 
biomass, particulate  organic matter potential mineral izable  nitrogen and conservation farming 
system.  When it is structural support, it is determined by soil structure, texture bulk density, 
landscape position, and aggregate stability.  So, these are the indicators of different soil 
functions, which governs the soil health .  (Refer Slide Time: 22:14) 
 
Now so, we have to remember that healt hy soil support ecosystem function like water storage 
and infiltration carbon capture, plus storage, or carbon sequestration, biological function, plus 
diversity, and also productive capacity.  So, it is very important to  maintain the soil health for 
maintaining the ecosystem function.   
(Refer Slide Time: 22:38) 
 
Now, what is the relevance of soil health measurement for intensive agriculture? Remember 
that indiscriminate fertilizer consumption can make the crops more vul nerable to p ets and 
diseases and excessive dependence on chemical fertilizer leads to more cost of cultivation.  
So, when we go for indiscriminate fertilizer consumption the crops are more vulnerable to 
pests and diseases . And, and finally, when we go for e xcessive dependence on chemical fertilizers , that also increases the cost of cultivation also creates the environmental pollution 
like soil pollution, air pollution, water pollution, it can produce hazards to human and 
animals.   
So, there is a dire need to  optimize the fertilizer usage by adapting, balanced nutrient 
management through soil health measures.  So, that is why it is, soil health measurements is 
very important for maintaining the intensive  agriculture .  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:52) 
 
Now, what are t he objectives of soil testing for soil fertility evaluation? We know that first of 
all, to assess the nutrient status of the soil crop system, second diagnose  suspected nutrient 
imbalances. And third is monitoring effects of management on crop nutrient sta tus and soil 
fertility.  So, these are the 3 major objectives of soil testing for soil fertility evaluation.   (Refer Slide Time: 24:24 ) 
 
So, the next question comes to our mind, what is the role of soil testing on soil health? First 
of all, soil testing a cts as a custodian of soil health to maintain the soil health. It is very much 
important to go for soil testing. Otherwise,  we do not know as I have mentioned that there are 
several chemical indicators and physical indicators for soil health, unless we do soil testing, 
how do we know that which one indicator is present in what quantity that means whether they  
are present in high, medium, or low quantity.   
So, that is why soil testing acts as a custodian of soil health. Also soil testing p olice over soil 
degradation. Now, if you continuously test your soil for soil organic carbon and other 
features, soil, bu lk density, soil structure, and all these things, you will be aware of the soil, 
strength and soil ecosystem functions.  
And also  you can monitor the soil  degradation process. Of course, when you go for the soil 
testing, you can check for soil abuse and misuse, and you can provide a basis for making 
fertilizer  recommendation for improving crop yield  and quality improving f ertilizer  use 
efficiency and decrea sing impacts on water quality.  So, these are the major role of soil testing 
for maintaining the soil health.   (Refer Slide Time: 26:06) 
 
So, there is a rating chart for soil test values for soil health assessment. It is, this chart has 
been compiled fro m, this source Tandon . And remember that here we have given that 
different soil properties and the ir different ranges. Of course, you will see for several 
elements, the ranges, which is mentioned here will not be exactly matching the ranges which 
we have d iscussed in our last week. That means week 6 of lectures, where we have discussed 
about high, medium, and low.  
Remember the critical nutrient concentration as I have mentioned, couple of times . The 
availability or the, of these, or the low, medium, or hig h ranges of these different nutrients 
vary from soil to soil vary from one region to another region. However, if you see there are 
almost similar to each other .  
So, do not guess please do  not get confused about the minor differences, which  is press, 
which  is there in the normal, and then in the low, medium and high ranges of different 
nutrients.   
So, if we see the pH of, 1:2.5 soil water suspension, we can see that if it is a less than 6.5, we 
call it acidic. When it is 6.5 to 7.5, it is neutral when it i s more than 7.5 , it is alkaline . For 
electrical conductivity critical is 1, 2, 3 injurious  is greater than 3. And normal is less than 1. 
Sometime we call it a 4 decisisa  per meter as a threshold value. When it is more than 4, it is 
called saline soil.  
How ever, here you can see it is less , greater than 3. So, in general, we consider 4 as a 
threshold limit. When you consider organic carbon, of course, 0.5 to 0.75  percent  is medium range while  less than 0.5  it is low and greater  than 0.75 it is high . For avai lable nitrogen 280 
to 560 is the medium range. When it is less than 280, it is low, but is more than 560  it is high.   
So, in this fashion, you can see available phosphorus,  potassium , sulphur and different 
micronutrients  and boron are also given . Remember,  these values may not exactly match with 
the values which you have already discussed, but they are very close to each other. So, these 
are the rating chart for soil test values for soil health assessment.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:06) 
 
Now based on the conten ts of available nutrients in terms of their soil test values like N P K 
the soils group ed into low, medium and high classes we know that . Now in general, the 
greatest response can be obtained from the low class and the least response from the high 
class in  soil test values . We have already discussed that in our lecture number 30.  So, this 
marks the end of this,  lecture 31, where we have discussed about the soil health and soil 
importance of soil health.  
What are the indicators of the soil health? Why we sh ould be concerned about soil 
degradation? What is soil degradation scenario in India? What are the indicators of soil 
degradation and how soil testing can  monitor the soil degradation processes. And also we 
have discussed about the rating chart of differen t soil properties.  So, let us wrap up this 
lecture here and in our next lecture, we  will start from here and we  will discuss more about 
soil testing and soil degradation and land capability classification. Thank you very much.  