Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture: 39  
Organic Manures, Manufacturing, Properties, and  
Fate of N, P, K and Micronutrient  Fertilizer s (Contd.)  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:21)  
 
Welcome friends to this 4th lecture of week 8 of NPTEL, online certification course of Soil 
Fertility and Fertilizers. In this week, we are discussing about organic manure s, 
manufacturing properties and fate of N , P, K and micronutrient fertilizers. In our previous 
lectures of this week, we have discussed in details about different types of manure s.  
And we have discussed about how to preserve and how to maintain the quality of those 
manure s, what are the fates of the nutrients from those manure  during the decomposition, and 
also, we have seen the basic classification of chemical fertilizers. And we have also discussed 
about some of the important concepts in fertilizers like fertilizer conditioner, fillers, fertilizer 
ratio, fertilizer grade, et cetera . (Refer Slide Time: 1:34)  
 
Now, in this lecture, we are going to discuss about the fertilizer manufacturing process of 
different chemical fertilizers. And these are the following these are the concepts which we are 
going to discuss in this lecture. First of all, we are going to discuss the classification of 
fertilizers. And then we are going to discuss the methods of liquid fertilizer application. We 
are also going to discuss the type of fertilizer used and produced in I ndia. Then 
manufacturing process of nitrogenous fertilizers and manufacturing process of SSP single 
super phosphate and Muri ate potassium . So, in this lecture , we are going to mainly focused 
on the chemical fertilizer their application and their manufactur ing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:18)  
  
So, these are some of the keywords which we are going to discuss in this lecture solid 
fertilizer , liquid fertilizer , fertilizer mixtures , urea, SSP. So, if we consider the classification 
of the mineral fertilizer accord ing to their physical form, we can classify them into solid 
fertilizer as well as liquid fertilizers. Now, the liquid fertilizers can be further divided into 
clear liquid fertilizers and suspension fertilizers. Now, this suspension fertilizers belong in th e 
group of liquid fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:07)  
 
So, if we consider the solid fertilizers , solid fertilizers can be produced in several forms. For 
example, in the powder form, for example, single super  phosphate , crystal , crystalline form 
like a mmonium sulfate , in prills like urea , diammonium phosphate  or DAP and super phosphate or single super phosphate. So, single super phosphate can be produced both in 
powder form  or in pills form .  
Also we can see the Holland granules form in the granular for m. And then we are going to 
see that urea super granules and also the urea briquettes. So, you can see from powder to 
crystals to pills to granules to super granules and decayed. So, there are several forms 
available in the market for the solid fertilizers .  
(Refer Slide Time: 4:11) 
 
Now, the production of these solid fertilizers and liquid fertilizer can be summarized in this 
following flowchart. So, you can see the production of liquid fertilizer consists of 2 major 
steps one is mixing and that is storag e. Now, conversely, the production of solid fertilizers 
consists of the following stages like granulation like mixing then granulation then drying, 
then sifting and finally, storage.  
So, this stage is here among the stages you can see drying, sifting are marked with a darker 
color to imply that these steps are the require more energy than those which are marked with 
a lighter color. So, we can see that they a re drying, sifting and to some extent granulation 
requires more energy than mixing and storage. So,  these are the major steps for production of 
solid fertilizers and liquid fertilizer from the raw materials.  (Refer Slide Time: 5:28)  
 
Now, if we consider the suspension fertilizer, which is a form of liquid fertilizer, there are 
different types of adv antages of suspension fertilizers, what are these first of all the 
application accuracy that means, it gives the better efficiency, the suspension fertilizers. 
Secondly, these liquid forms of the suspension fertilizer ensures better digestibility third 
important aspect of this suspension fertilizer is it produce it does  not produce any waste 
during the production.  
So, it is waste free production , also suspension fertilizer when you prepare the suspension 
fertilizer, these are made of wastes. So, ultimately  the production of suspension fertilizer 
limits the extraction of natural resources. And secondly, the  production of suspension 
fertilizer produce less waste in landfills. So, since the production of the suspension fertilizer 
use the waste. So, ultimately it reduces the waste in the landfill.  (Refer Slide Time: 6:47)  
 
 
Now, if we consid er the fertilizer application or  methods of fertilizer application, these are of 
2 types one is soil application and that is foliar appl ication. So, soil application or  foliar 
application . Now, what is foliar application ? Foliar application or Foliar Spray refers to the 
spraying of fertilizer solution on foliage or leaves of growing plants in low concentration up 
to 2 to 3 percentage.  
Now, this Foliar Spray ensures unifo rm distribution, the folly and the rates of the foliar spray 
is lower than the soil application and the most important aspect of foliar sprays it provides 
immediate response almost immediate response since we are applying directly in the crops. 
So, this is  called a foliar spray. However, when we apply the foliar spray, we cannot apply in high concentration otherwise that will damage the leaves. So, we apply the foliar spray to the 
up to the concentration of 2 to 3 percentage.  
(Refer Slide Time: 8:06)  
 
Now, what are the advantages and disadvantages of foliar application? First of all, the foliar 
application is useful to correct the nutrient deficiency for growing crops because it gives the 
immediate response almost immediate response. So, it useful to corr ect the deficiency of the 
growing crops. Secondly, in dry weather condition or what a deficient zone is very much 
useful. And thirdly, when the widely spread foliage are there in the field that can create the 
difficulties for soil application and as a resu lt, we go for the foliar application from the 
operational simplicity point of view also.  
So, these are the advantages of foliar application. However, there are several disadvantages 
also first of all, marginal l eaf burns or scorching as I have mentioned i f we increase the 
concentration of the nutrients in the foliar application that can create l eaf burns or scorching. 
Secondly, only a small quantity of the nutrients can be supplied at a time. Thirdly, we 
required several applications and as a result, the f oliar application can be costly sometime. 
So, these are the disadvantages of foliar application.  (Refer Slide Time: 9:32)  
 
Now, the chemical fertilizers can be classified into 3 categories. We already know that that 
straight fertilizer , complex fertili zer and fertilizer mixtures. Now these mixtures of fertilizer 
can be also seen in either powdery form or granulated mixtures. As you can see here, these 2 
are straight fertilizer like urea is a straight fertilizer this is also ammonium sulfide which is a 
straight fertilizer . However, here it is a mixed fertilizer, which has the grade of 15 15  15. So, 
sorry 15  15 7.5.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:19 )  
 
So, these are the classification of chemical fertilizers, one of the major drawback of 
application of straight fertilizer is straight fertilizer can supply only one nutrient at a time. So, 
for the application of individual nutrient will require increased labor in transport cost and storage cost. So, these are the problems of application of straight fertilizer. So, t o avoid these 
generally we apply fertilizer mixtures, fertilizer mixtures also known as blended fertilizers. 
So, a mixture of 2 or more straight fertilizer material is referred to as fertilizer mixture. So, 
the term complete fertilizer mixture refers to th ose fertilizers that contain all 3 major nutrients 
like N , P and K .  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:09)  
 
What are the advantages of fertilizer mixtures, first of all less labor is required to apply a 
mixture then to apply its components separately. Secondly, use a fertilizer mixture leaves to 
balance manuring . Thirdly, the residual acidity of fertilizer can be effectively controlled by 
using the proper quantity of lime in the fertilizer mixture. Micronutrients can be incorporated 
in fertilizer mixture and finally,  mixture has better physical condition. So, these are the 
advantages of fertilizer mixtures.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:52 )  
 
At the same time, there are several disadvantages of fertilizer mixture first of all, fertilizer 
mixtures does not permit individual  Nutrient Application at specific growth stage of crop , 
unit cost of plant nutrients in mixtures is usually higher than those of straight fertilizers and 
farmers use mixture without careful study of their needs.  
So, what are the materials and methods of p reparing blended fertilizer mixtu res? So, grade of  
fertilizer mixture to be prepared should be decided first. Secondly, straight fertilizers are 
choosing according to compatibility in the mixture. And third the quantity of each fertilizer is 
calculated for  the desired quantity of preparing fertilizer mixture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:51 )  
 Now, if there is a gap in weight of fertilizer taken based on nutrient content and the total 
weight of the fertilizer mixtures  the gap is generally  filled by using filler , what is filler ? We 
have already discussed. So, the common filler material sand, soil, ground coal, ash and other 
waste products, it is also necessary to add the conditioners to avoid that caking  that means 
clumping of the fertilizer that is called caking .  
So, for these low grade organic materials like tobacco stem , peat groundnut and paddy husk 
are added at the rate of 100 pound per ton of mixture. Now, if the fertilizer cause and a 
fertilizer cause  an acidic residual effect, when added in soil lining mat erials like limestone, 
dolomite et cetera  are added if the fertilizer materials are mixed manually without special 
equipment, it should be done on the cement floor and preferably on the date of application or 
a day before its application. So, these are the  steps for preparation of fertilizer mixtures.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:15 )  
 
Now, let us see the type of fertilizer produced in India we  can see the state fertilizers s ome 
examples are given like ammonium sulfate contains 20.6  percent  Nitrogen, calcium 
amm onium nitrate can contain 25  percent  Nitrogen , ammonium chloride contains 25  percent  
Nitrogen , urea cont ain 46 percent  Nitrogen , straight  phosphatic fertilizers like single super 
phosphate cont ain 16 percent  P2O5, triple super phosphate content 46  percent  P2O5,  NPK 
complex fertilizers like urea ammonium phosphate contain these grades like 24  25 0, then 28 
28 0, then 14  35 14 then ammonium phosphate sulfate has 2 grades like 16  20 0, 20 20 0 
Diammonium phosphate it is a complex fertilizer contains 18  46 0, mono ammonium 
phosphate grade 11  52 0, then nitro phosphate has the grade of 20  20 0 and 23  23 0.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:20 ) 
 
Various types are blended or mixed fertilizers, we can see here 17  17, s o, nitr o phosphate 
with potash 15 15  15. Different NPK fer tilizers are 17 17  17 then 14  28 14 , 19 19  19, 10 26 
26 and 12  32 16. So, these are different fertilizer mixtures or mixed fertilizers available in 
Indian market.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:52 )  
  
Now, let us see the manufacturing process of different fertil izers. So, let us first focus on 
ammonium sulfate which is a straight nitrogenous fertilizer. So, this is the ammonium sulfate 
process and let us discuss. So, a 25 percent  solution of ammonia is passed into a tower with 
full of aluminium ring through which  carbon dioxide is bubbled and ammonium carbonate is 
formed.  
So, here ammonium is injected in this tower where carbon dioxide is bubbled through this 
aluminium ring and ultimately this ammonium and carbon dioxide reacts to form the 
ammonium carbonate , the reaction is here. So, there i s ammonium plus carbon dioxide plus 
water produced the ammonium carbonate plus water.  
In the second stage the ammonium carbonate solution is mixed with a cream of calcium 
sulfate or Gypsum to obtain ammonium sulfate. So, here  you can see in the mixing tank these 
ammonium carbonate is mixed with the gypsum slurry to produce these ammonium sulfate. 
So, these ammonium carbonate plus calcium sulfate produced ammonium sulfate plus 
calcium carbonate. So, this calcium carbonate is re moved.  
So, we can remove these calcium carbonate and subsequently in the vacuum evaporator and 
these materials is transferred to the vacuum evaporator and then dry it to cooler to produce 
the solid ammonium sulfate. So, we can see that the ammonium sulfat e solution is 
concentrated in the vacuum evaporator and crystals are removed by filtration dried and 
cooled and sold as ammonium sulfate. So, this is how ammonium sulfate is being 
manufactured.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:34 )  
 
 
Next important nitrogenous fe rtilizer is urea. So, in the converted we first compress the 
carbon dioxide and liquid ammonium in high pressure with 400 atmosphere and with the high 
temperature 160 to 200 degrees centigrade ultimately urea is  form and then we produce , it 
goes to the eva porator and then crystallizer and (())(18:04)  to centrifuges and ultimately to 
mixer dryer. So, ultimately produce the pr illed urea.  Let us see the process.  
So, this is the reaction. So, firstly ammonia plus carbon dioxide which produce the 
ammonium carba mate and this ammonium carbamate  will dissociate to form these urea and 
water molecule. So, this is an exothermic synthesis and you can see this ammonium 
carbonate  is dehydrated to form the urea . What is the process ? So, the carbon dioxide and 
liquid ammon ia are allowed to react in the liquid phase under considerably elevated pressure and temperature in the converter we know that so, they are they are mixed in the converted to 
react to form the urea and the unreacted ammonia and carbon dioxide removed by ev aporated 
and then recycled.  
So, the unreacted ammonia and carbon dioxide are evaporated are extracted by these 
evaporated and then they will be recycled and the urea solution is pumped into the 
crystallizer where cooling and crystallization are placed and  the urea crystals are centrifuge 
and dried . So, you can see we can we can send this mixture urea into the crystallizes and then 
centrifuge where they will be crystallized and cooled and then the solution evaporated to less 
than 1  percent  moisture and the molten u rea is  sprayed down to tower against a counter 
current of dry air to get the pellets. So, ultimately they will go to the dryer and ultimately  they 
will be sprayed into the counter current of air in a tower to produce the prilled urea. So, this is 
the urea manufacturing process.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:55 )  
  
Third important fertilizer that is phosphate fertilizer is DAP or diammonium phosphate in the 
diammonium phosphate bas ically in the evaporator we mix these anhydrous ammonia and 
orthophosphoric  acid to produce these diammonium phosphate in series of neutralizing tanks 
and ultimately we produce the DAP. So, the reaction is ammonia which mix with 
orthophosphoric acid  to produce this diammonium phosphate.  
Now , the DAP is manufactured by mixing an excess quantity of ammonia with phosphoric 
acid. The phosphoric acid was first synthesized from the rock phosphate and then the crude 
phosphoric acid is used to manufacture this DAP. So, the reaction is carried out in a series of 
agitators or neutralizing tank as you can see , the series of agitators or neutralizing tanks lined 
with acid proof bricks and le ad so lined with acid proof bricks and lead. So, the resultant 
slurry becomes paste like and crystallizes to solid mass on cooling and the produce product  is 
dried and sold as diammonium phosphate.  
So, what happens so, this reaction between the orthophosphoric acid and ammonia takes 
place in a series of neutralizing tanks and these resulted and a slurry is formed, which is a 
paste like so, and this paste i s crystallizes to solid mass on cooling and then subsequently 
they are being dried granulated and sold as DAP fertilizer.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:35 )  
 
 
 Now, the next important fertilizer , phosphoric fertilizer is single super phosphate or SSP. So 
in the single super phosphate this is the process. So, here we generally produce the single 
super phosphate from the ground rock phosphate  and then it goes to the pan mixture and den 
or pit where it is being mixed with the sulfuric acid and then it produced th e single super 
phosphate. Now , the process is given here.  
So, you can see here this is the rock phosphate, when it mixed with the sulfuric acid it 
produces the single super phosphate or mono calcium phosphate and so the rock phosphate is 
treated with sulf uric acid to convert the insoluble unavailable tri calcium phosphate to 
available monocalcium phosphate.  
Now, the process is the calculated quantity of the sulfuric acid and 4 major ground rock 
phosphate and introduced and mixed to the mix thoroughly then  dropped in den or pit. So we 
can see here these H 2 SO4 tank will release the acid into th is pan mixture and ultimately it go 
to the den and then ground rock phosphate and see rocks phosphate will form a C will go to 
the pan mixture and then mix with the D en or pit and then so the principle of single super 
phosphate formation is basically here we will react the rock phosphate with the sulfuric acid 
to convert into the soluble single super soluble mono calcium phosphate.  
So, the rock phosphate it is a tri c alcium phosphate which is insoluble and when it reacts with 
the sulfuric acid it produced the mono calcium phosphate or single super phosphate. So 
basically what happens here in this process we general ly ground rock phosphate and it 
receive  it through 4 massive and then we mix it with the H2 SO4 in a d en or pit we keep it for 
24 to 35 hours in this reaction pit and th ere will be a loss of volume of 10  percent  due to the 
escape of water , carbon dioxide and fluorine compounds and the product is dried and grou nd 
to a very fine powder and stored for sufficient time for curing of material and then granulated 
and sold as single super phosphate. So, this is how single super phosphate is being formed.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:22 )  
 
 
 And finally, this is Muriate o f potash or as the name suggests, it is basically potassium 
chloride and this is the process of formation or manufacturing of these Muriate of potash or 
potassium chloride. So, the process is described in the next slide. So, the process is based on 
the dif ferences in specific gravity of potassium chloride and sodium chloride. Sodium 
chloride has a specific gravity of 2.16 whereas the potassium chloride has a  specific gravity 
of 1.98 so KCL having lesser  specific gravity and floats on the top of so dium chlor ide.  
So, in in this process the method of refining is the most widely practiced and the most 
economical method of recovering silver aid from the s ylvite from the sylvinite  which is 
basically mixture of KCL sodium chloride and clay . So basically,  we extrac t or recovered the 
sylvite or KCL from the sylvinite  which is basically mixture of KCL, sodium chloride and 
clay.  
So, what are the major steps in this process first of all crushing and screening and then adding 
a saturated brine of sodium chloride and pot assium chloride to produce a pulp containing 50 
to 70  percent  solid and wet grinding and removal of the slime. So, you can see here first of all 
we are grinding the sodium chloride , potassium chloride and clay that is sylvinite  and then we 
are making it a pulp and then we are removing the slimes from this pulp and ultimately, so, 
this is the steps .  
And the next is introducing the sylvite containing brine into series of flotation cells providing 
agitation and introduction of air which adheres  is in the form  of bubbles to the surface and 
flotation concentrate is harvested from the top of the referred cells. So, here as you can see 
this mixture  is basically goes into these agitators or these flotation cells and these flotation 
cells will be also will add the a ir to form the bubbles and the bubbles and these floated 
materials  will be harvested subsequently.  
So, after harvesting, it is introduced into the cleaner flotation circuit for further refining  the 
sylvite and the un floated materials, unfloated particles from the cleaner circuit occurred to the 
rougher  cell and drying in a rotary dryer screening and bagging and sold as Muriate of 
potash . So, you can see here these unfloated materials to those which are not floated will be 
again going to this rougher  cell f rom th is cleaner cell and the materials which are there in the 
cleaner cell will be centrifuge and drying they will be subsequently dried and screened and 
ultimately sold as Muriate of potash .  So, basically in this flotation process, which occurs in these  cells, which we call the flotation 
cells, so, in this flotation cells, you can see that they the sylvite is basically recovered from 
the silver night mixture based on the difference of the specific gravity. Since the specific 
gravity of KCL is less than t he specific gravity of sylvinite , it will be floated in the mixture 
and then it will be easily separated or recovered from this mixture and then it will undergo 
drying process and the screening process and bagging and finally, it will be sold as Muriate 
of potash .  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:40 ) 
 
So, guys, this makes  the end of this lecture. Let us wrap up this lecture and we wi ll start from 
here in the next lecture. And we will do we wi ll see more about these fertilizer calculations 
and other important aspects  of chemical fertilizer in our next lecture. So, thank you le t us 
meet in our next lecture.  
 