Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur   
Lecture : 34 
Soil Health and Quality, Problem Soil, Land Capability Classification (Contd.)  
Welcome friend s to th is 34th lecture of NPTE L online certification course of soil fertility and 
fertilizers. And we are at currently week 7 lecture and in this week we are discussing about 
soil health and quality and problems soil and land capability classification.  
So, in this week we have already discussed about soil health and soil degradation soil health 
indicators, and then we have discussed about soil health card scheme by government of India , 
what are the benefits of soil health card scheme , what are the different  aspects of soil health 
scheme , and also we have discussed about the soil quality , soil quality index in details , how 
to calculate soil quality index , how to identify th e minimum dataset , how to score those 
indicators, linear scoring nonlinear scoring then  how to calculate those indices. So, we have 
already discussed those in our previous lectures.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:44)  
 
In this lecture we are going to cover these following concepts. So, first of all we are going to 
discuss the sources of soil acidific ation then we are going to discuss the dynamics of soil 
acidification and then we are going to discuss the impact on natural availability and crop 
growth basically the impact of soil acidity and then we are going to discuss recent advances 
in management of  soil acidity. And finally, we are going to discuss major constants of salt 
affected soils. So, these are the concepts which we are going to discuss in this lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 2:18)  
 
Apart from that, these are the keywords like soil acidity, so il acidity pools , liming material s, 
soil then salt affected soil , and alkaline soil these are some of the key words of this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:33)  
 
Now, we all know that definition of pH, pH is basically the negative logarithm of hydrogen 
ion concentration and in soil apart from the hydrogen ion, the aluminium also acts as a source 
of soil acidity. So, below pH 5 around pH 5.5 aluminium generat es the protons in the soil 
thus behaving like acidic i on. Now, that is why whenever we talk about soi l acidity, we 
generally indicate the submission of both hydrogen ion  as well as the aluminium ions.  As you can see in this picture, it is quite clear that as aluminium hydroxides ulti mately goes 
towards aluminium i on it consumes the protons however, this aluminium ions at pH 5 
generally hydrolyzed to form these it goes towards these gib bsite from the aluminium ion and 
as a result of this conversion from this aluminium ion to this gibbsite or amorphous solid 
aluminum hydroxide it generates these hydrogen io ns or protons and thereby decreasing the 
pH of the soil.  
So, that means, in acidic soil not only we can see the dominance of H plus ions  also we can 
see the dominance of aluminium ion and these aluminium ion concentration can lead to 
aluminium toxicity, u ltimately impacting the root growth. So, soil acidity  can be also 
differentiated into different grades.  
Like very strong, strong , medium , slight in neutral and then pH can be of mild moderate, 
strong alkaline and very strong alkaline. Now if we see the so dic soils which we are going to 
discuss, so sodic soils are basically showing high or strong alkalinity . Calcar eous soil can 
show the mild to strong alkalinity.  
However, humid regio n arable soil generally shows the strong to around neutral acidity and 
in case of forest soil , forest  soils can show very strong to slightly acidic pH . Acid peat s soils 
can show very strong to extreme low pH or extreme high acidity and active acidity sulfate 
soil should generally shows extreme amount of soil acidity. So, these a re different types of 
ranges of soil acidity which you can see in in soils.  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:10)  
 Now, acidification can be caused by different processes. First of all, if you see the root 
respiration and organic matter decomposition, these are 2 major sources of carbon dioxide. 
Now, due to the organic matter decomposition or root respiration there is higher carbon 
dioxide or higher partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the soil layer.  
And when this carbon dioxide reacts with water, it forms the car bonic acid , the carbonic acid 
reacts with the calcite or calcium carbonate which is present in the soil and they are were  
dissolving . So, you can see calcium carbonate when it reacts with H2CO3  it produces 
calcium ion and  bicarbonate ion. Apart from that t hese H2CO3  can also produce bicarbonate 
ion and produce the protons.  
So, these can also impact this calcite and ultimately can produce and dissolve this calcite. So, 
this calcium carbonate when it reacts with H plus ion, it can also produce these calcium ion 
and bicarbonate ion. So, these are the reactions you can see calcium carbonate reacts with 
carbonic acid to form the calcium ion and bicarbonate ion. Also the calcium carbonate when 
it reacts with proton it produced the calcium ion as well as bicarbona te ion . 
Also, calcium carbonate reacts with water molecules to produce this calcium and carbonate 
ions and water molecules. Also these nitrogen fixation on plant roots can also generate H plus 
ion, these H plus ion  reacts with calcite to produce these calc ium and bicarbonate ion. So, this 
is how these acidity soil acid ity generates and after producing the soil acidity, they can react 
to dissolve this calcium carbonate or calcite in the soil.  
Sometime this carbon dioxide can also exist into the atmosphere o r escape into the 
atmosphere. So, these are some of the potential reaction which occurs due to acidification.  (Refer Slide Time: 8:48)  
 
Now soil acidification in terms of capacity factors, we can define that the amounts of strong 
acid are added or the changes in the acid neutralizing capacity of a soil  system. Now the acid 
neutralizing capacity can be also denoted by ANC . So soil acidification is basically the 
changes in the acid neutralizing capacity of  a soil  system.  
Now, if we see this hypothet ical titration curve of a calcar eous soil upon slow and quick 
acidification, so you can see the slow shows these broken lines or dashed line. However, this 
is the reaction or this is the curve  which shows the quick acidification of a higher pH 
calca reous clay s oil. So as we are going to increase these hydrogen ions , the pH will steadily 
decrease in case of quick acidification and slowly decrease in case of slow acidification.  
(Refer Slide Time: 9:54)  
 Now, let us see various sources of soil acidification. So one of them is pool of organic matter. 
So, this pool of organic matter, that produce nitrification of more mineralized organic 
nitrogen, which can produce this nitric acid and ultimately that contributes to this ANC 
decreases or increasing of acidity.  Also  these HN O3 basically impact these ANC by leaching  
these basic cations by nitrate  so, this is one process . 
Also that root respiration can produce the weak acid which you have just covered that is 
carbonic acid and this carbonic acid can also that helps in dissolution of cation  like in calcium 
carbonate and also finally, it helps in building the soil acidity . 
And also the cation  liberation and leaching can also impact the soil acidity. So, if we broadly 
classify soil internal production of acid, we can say p roduction or decomposition of organic 
matter is one of the reason and root respiration is another reason. However, when you talk 
about the effect of addition of acid by irrigation and rainwater, then we can see that cation 
liberation  leaching can impact th e soil acidity.  
So, for example, when we add the sulfuric acid that can help in cation , liberation and leaching 
and ultimately that impact the soil acidity by reducing it . Also, this addition of H2SO4  can 
help in sulfate absorption retention or precipitat ion by iron and aluminium. So, that also 
impact  the acidity. So, these are some of the various sources of soil acidification.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:06 )  
 
Now, let us see different types of soil acidity pools. So, in generally, we have we generally 
define  3 different pools of soil acidity, one is called active acidity, second one is called 
exchangeable or salt extractable acidity and third one is residual acidity . Now, from our knowledge of diffused double layered, we know that clay surface generates negat ive charge 
and these positive charge cations  are strongly adsorbed onto this negatively charged surface . 
Just adjacent to this clay surface  there is a swarm of cations . And ultimately as we go farther 
away from the surface of the clay mineral, the cation distribution generally goes down into 
the bulk of soil solution. Now, there are 3 different terms , one is called active acidity, second 
is exchangeable acidity, and third one is residual acidity.  
Now, what is activate acidity?  According to this good pictur e you can see that activate acidity  
is basically accounts , the concentration of aluminium and H plus ion in the soil solution. That 
means, whatever H plus ion and Al3 plus ion are  present in the bulk solution surrounding the 
clay mineral, these are general ly accounting for the active acidity.  
The second one is salt replaceable or exchangeable acidity. So, salt replaceable or 
exchangeable acidity is basically the acidity which is generated by the Al3 plus ion and H 
plus ion held near the clay and humus surf ace not only  the clay surface, but also humus  
surface also can adsorb these cations.  
 Now these adsorbed cations  which are held near the clay and humus  surface are responsible 
for the salt replaceable or exchangeable acidity. The third one is residual acid ity that means 
the aluminium and H bound on clay and humus. So, the aluminium and proton which are 
bound on clay and humus are responsible for residual acidity . So these are 3 different types of 
acidity  pools of soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:59 )  
 Now what  are the impact of soil acidity or nutrient availa bility to plant and crop growth?  We 
have already discussed this thing a couple of times however, I  am going to repeat the same 
thing. So, we know that with the increase of the soil pH we can get higher avai lability of 
calcium and magnesium. So, that means in the acidic soil we can see low activity of calcium 
ions and high activity of H ions or protons.  
And also we can see high ammonium to nitrate ratio and also we can see high active acidity 
of the ions. An d also we can see this is the high activity of aluminium ions, and also we can 
see high activities of iron and manganese ions. And also we can see in the pH soil, the 
availability of calcium and magnesium are reduced  and the availability of different 
micro nutrients are increased.  
So, we can see in case of acidic soil, we can see high activities of hydrogen and aluminium 
ion and iron and manganese ions.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:28 )  
 
Now, what are the processes to consume these protons ions to manage the soi l acidity ? 
Whatever strategy you must add up all these are generated towards consuming these H plus 
ion to improve or to enhance the pH of the soil . First of all, we can either input carbonate or 
bicarbonate to enhance the soil pH or consume these H plus i on and we can also deposit the 
basic cations like calcium magnesium.  
There is another possibility of an ion protonation where these H plus and reacts with the anion  
to get , to help in consumption of H plus ion to increase the soil pH or reduce the soil acid ity. 
Also an ion uptake by plants are is another way , protonation of pH  dependent charge is another way of consuming these H plus ion. You remember that when there is a pro tonation 
of H plus ion that can also increase the soil pH . 
And finally, absorption of  acid cations  like H plus Al3 plus these are the acidic cations . So, 
adsorption of these acidic cations  can help in managing the soil acidity.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:10 )  
 
The amelioration of aluminium toxicity in acid soils can be done by adding differen t organic 
residues. Now, how these organic residues impact the amelioration of aluminium is given 
here, so, when there is a decomposition of organic residue that can increase the soil organic 
matter and release of different types of aliphatic organic acids  and release a soluble humic 
material . All these in turn help in complex session of aluminium and thereby reducing their 
toxicity.  
Also decomposition of organic residue can increase the soil pH and helps in precipitation of 
soluble and exchangeable alumin ium ion. Now, when there is an increase of the s oil pH there 
that helps in proton  consumption by different functional groups , decarboxylation of organic 
acid anion and am monification  of residue and anaerobic reduction of high val enced oxides.   
So, basicall y, these are responsible for increasing in soil pH, like ammonification  of residue  
nitrogen, anaerobic reduction of high valence oxides, which ultimately helps in precipitation 
of soluble and exchangeable aluminium ion. And ultimately, all of these will he lp in either a 
reduction in the quantity of phytotoxic aluminium in soil.  Again, we can see decomposition of organic residue can help in reducing the aluminium 
toxicity either by complexation or by increasing soil pH by different processes , like prot on 
consumption , decarboxylation of orga nic ac id anion, ammonification  of residual nitrogen and 
anaerobic reduction of high valence d oxides .  
So, these are some of the ways through which amelioration of aluminium toxicity can be 
done by the addition of organic r esidues.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:15 )  
 
Now, let us see how to correct the soil acidity . Now, first and most important way of 
correcting the soil acid ity is the application of lim ing materials, what are the liming 
materials ? You can see here calcium carbona te, calcium magnesium carbonate or dolomite s, 
calcite , dolomite, calcium oxide, magnesium oxide, calcium silicate et cetera s o, when we 
add this dolomitic limestone  we can see it reacts with water and carbon dioxide to produce 
these calcium bicarbonate ion s.  
So, bicarbonate is very reactive in removing the residual and exchangeable acidity. So, you 
can see wherever they are H plus and Al3 plus ions are absorbed on to the clay, then this 
bicarbonate ion basically will remove these H plus and Al3 plus and ultimately replacing 
them with calcium. So, this is a way through  which application of lim ing material can correct 
soil acidity.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:27 )  
 
Amount of lim e use depends on pH target of course and depth of application , buffering 
capacity of t he soil li ming mater ial used and fineness of the lim ing material. So, you can see 
in this graph, fine textured soil need more lining as their buffering capacity to resist  the pH is  
more. So, that is why split application of lime is recommended.  
So, of cou rse, you can se e there are different types of s o, there is an initial soil pH and when 
we add this ground limestone you can see clearly that clay lo ams require higher quantity of 
ground limestone and the reduction of soil pH is also less steep than other s oils where clay 
content is less.  
So, since this clay loa ms contain higher clay content which has h igher buffering capacity than 
silt loam s, loam s, sandy loam s and s ands that impact in the slow reduction of soil pH.  (Refer Slide Time: 22:43 )  
 
Another w ay of correcting soil acidity is using organic matter. So, when we add this organic 
matter, they bind with the aluminium and reduce their mobility and they complex aluminium 
into non-toxic  form we have already discussed that . 
Third  is growing adapted plant s. So, it is a very practical solution and crop native to acid soils 
can be cultivated and through genetic engineering new resilient varieties also can be 
developed.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:16 )  
 
Now, if you see compara tive liming effect of 4 organic resid ues managing acidic soil, so, you 
can see here there are 4 different organic residues like compost residues and then filter cake and then poultry manure  and you can see their impact in raising the soil pH we can see the 
poultry manure can impact the ra ise of can significantly impact the soil pH .  
Also, we can see that when we add this thing, exchangeable aluminum get s reduced. So, the 
impact of poultry manure  in changing or fixing the soil acidity is quite, quite obvious. So, 
here the application rate and d ifferent grass vegetations are also mentioned. So, the basic idea 
is when we add organic matter that can correct this problem of soil acidity by different ways. 
And different types of organic matter has their own capacity to reduce the soil acidity.  
(Refe r Slide Time: 24:30 )  
 
Now, this is also inf luences  of amelior ants application on soil pH and exchangeable Al3 plus 
ion over a period of 3 years. So, you can clearly see that with the a pplication of different 
amelior ants, then we can see the pH of the soi l is increased and also exchangeable  Al3 plus 
ion gets reduced. So, different types of amelior ants can help in reducing the soil pH or 
reducing the soil acidity or increasing the soil pH.  (Refer Slide Time: 25:13 )  
 
So, if we see the influence of applic ation amelior ants on rice yield, we can see that when 
these NPK was applied with fly ash and man ure, we can see there is a considerable increase 
in soil, in rice yield as compared to the other treatments in all 3 years. So, that shows the 
importance of ameliorants on rice yield or crop yield.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:51 )  
 
Now, let us see another type of important problematic soil that is called salt  affected soil . Salt 
affected soil can be defined as a soil which contains soluble salts in such a high concen tration 
that adversely affects the growth and yield of most of the crops.  Now, remember that the salt a ffected soils can be also classified into 3 categories, one is 
salin e soil, second is alkali soil , third is saline alkali soil . Now, what are the differ ences ? So, 
the sal ine soil the pH is less than 8.5 whereas, in case of alkali and saline alkali soil pH is 
greater than 8.5 .  
In case of saline soil, the electrical conductivity of saturation extract is greater than 4 
decisiemens  per meter whereas, in case  of alkali  soil it is less than 4, in case of saline alkali  
soil, it is again greater than 4.  Exchangeable sodium percentage is less than 15 in case of 
saline soil  whereas, in case of alkali  soil and saline alkali soil it is greater than 15 . Sodium 
absorpt ion ratio is less than 13 in case of saline soil whereas, it is higher than  13 in alkali  soil 
and saline  alkali  soil or saline sodic soil . 
What are the major cations  the major ions are mainly in case of saline soil the major ions are 
calcium and magnesium and sulfate and fluoride in case of alkali  soil salts of calcium and 
magnesium with sodium and saline alkali  soil mainly sodium and carbonate and bicarbonate 
salts. So, these are the distribution of major ions and their properties in different , 3 different  
types of salt affected soils.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:47 )  
 
So, this is a picture of a salt  affected  soil you can see here that there is salt crust white soil 
crust which is deposited over the soil surface. So, this is a perfect example of salt affected 
soils. (Refer Slide Time: 28:03 )  
 
Another  type of soil is called sodic soils. So, sodic soils are those soils which contain high 
amount of sodium. So, these sodic soils shows these are very unfavorable soil for plant 
growth. So, because it shows slaking , swelling and dispersion and 2 causes of soil dispersion  
so sodic soil is  high sodium and low soil concentration . 
Due to the presence of low soil concentration and high sodium the flocculation of the 
colloidal particles do not occur and they remain suspen se in the colloidal solution . Ultimately 
creating an impervious layer which is very harmful for the germination of the seedling. So, 
the physical degradation we can see clearly in case of sodic  soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:58 )  
 Now, the plant growth is se verely hampered due to the toxicity of sodium hydroxyl and 
bicarbonate ions  in case of sodic soil.  These soils have also columnar structure as you can see 
here, these are the columnar structure and these are characterized by extremely poor soil 
condition p hysical condition, slow permeability to water and  air and  clay dispersion reduces 
the crop productivity.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:31 )  
 
So, these are the some of the features of sodic soil or alkali so il remember  alkali  soil and  
sodic soils are used synonym ously . So, these are the distribution of salt affected  soils of the 
world we can see salin e soil and sodic soil content say some small part whereas saline soil we 
generally in the world is around 3.1  percent  and also in case of sodic soil that is also 3.4  
percent.  
Salt affected  soils in India you can see that non salt affected soils accounts for 97.9  percent.  
However , 2.1 percent  of the salt soils are  salt affected soils in India . This shows the 
distribution of saline and alkaline soils in India we can see that alkali  soil is 56  percent  
whereas saline soil i s only 44  percent  and saline soils of India you can see that inland saline 
soil is 58 percent  whereas, coastal saline soil is 42  percent.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:35 )  
 
So, what are the constraints of sali ne soil ? First of all, you can see poor germination, salt 
crusting, and as a result there is a poor germination and poor emergence of seedling  and also 
salt toxicity like root injury, hampering the root growth or reduced microbial activity you can 
see. Nutrient deficiency you can see in case of saline soil like poor crop growth poor yield. 
Low osmotic potential like reduced water uptake and physiological drought. These are some 
of the constraints of a saline soil . 
What is physiological drought ? Physiologica l drought means, when the soil has enough 
moisture, but plant cannot take it because of the higher salinity in the soil or high salt 
concentration as a result that is called physiologically dry soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:24)  
 Also, these are the constr aints of the sodic soil like nutrient imbalance, degraded soil 
structure, low hydraulic conductivity and then due to the formation of soil crust  that impact 
the infiltration rate that increases the runoff and also poor  emergence of seedling that also 
impac t the low microbial activity by inhibiting the mineralization cycle and reduce nutrient 
availability. So, these are the some of the constants of sodic  soil or yield  effects of sodic soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:00 )  
 
 
So, guys, this makes the end of this  lecture these are the references for this lecture. I hope you 
have learned something new. If you have any queries,  please let me know. And let us meet in 
our next lecture. Thank you.  