Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur   
Lecture : 32 
Soil Health and Quality, Problem Soil, Land Capability Classification (Contd.)  
Welcome friend s to this second lecture of week seven of the NPTEL  online certification, 
course , of soil fertility and fertilizers. In this week, we are discussing about soil health , 
problems soils , soil quality , and land capability classification.  
In our first lecture of this week, we have discussed about what is soil health, what are the 
indicators of soil health and also we have discussed about the soil degradation and soil 
degradation processes. We have seen the overview of world soil degradation and also we 
have see n the anthropogenic degradation of soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:14)  
 
Now, in this lecture we are going to cover this following concept first of all we are going to 
discuss the soil health card scheme from the perspective of Indian soil management. Apart 
from that we have also discussed we will also discuss soil health card based fertilizer 
recommendation and we are going to also discuss agricultural management practices for 
improving soil health. And also finally, we are going to discuss  about soil quality  attributes. 
So, the major focus of this lecture will be soil health card and the related information.  (Refer Slide Time: 1:55)  
 
So, these are the keywords for this lecture, nutrient deficiency , soil quality , soil health card, 
soil quality index , and a lso partial factor productivity.  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:14)  
 
Now, if we start discussing about what is soil health card, it is basically a scheme which was 
started by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare on December 5 , 2015 in India.  
Now, soil health card or in short form  we call it SHC is a printed report which contains 
nutrient status of soil with respect to 12 different  nutrients. So, what are those 12 different 
nutrients ? You can see in the screen they are pH, electrical conductivity, organi c carbon, 
nitro gen, phosphorus, potassium, sulph ur, zinc, boron, iron, manganese and copper of farm 
holdings.  Now, when I talk about these nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, sulfur, zinc, boron, iron, 
manganese and copper, remember that these are all availa ble fractions. So, as a whole, when 
we are measuring these 12 fertility properties we can give and we can also have a overview 
of the fertility status of the soil and we can accordingly give the recommendation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:39)  
 
Now, this what i s the requi rement for the soil health card?  So, the soil health card is provided 
just like a prescription. This soil health card is provided to all the farmers of the country at an 
interval of 3 years to enable the farmers to supply or apply recommended do ses of nutrients 
in the soil based on soil test values to realize improved and sustainable soil health and fertility 
also to a low cost and higher profits.  
So, remember that the sustainable soil management has become an important agenda for 
Indian subcont inent, because here we can see a huge amount of soil degradation. Now, 
government has given emphasis for maintaining the soil health and maintaining and 
sustaining the soil health. So, the soil health card scheme basically aims to give the soil health 
card to the farmers of the country at an interval of 3 years.  
It is a field specific detailed report of soil fertility status, and other important soil parameters 
that affect crop productivity. Remember that farmers can track their soil samples and also 
obtai n their soil health card report from online , from the website of Soil Health Card.  
According to the National productivity council or NPC, the soil health card scheme has led to 
a decline of 8 to 10  percent  in the use of chemical fertilizers and also raise d productivity by 5 
to 6 percent . So, with the help of the soil health card scheme, it is possible it was possible to increase the productivity and decrease the use of chemical fertilizer for sustainable soil 
management.  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:08)  
 
Now, r emember, in this scheme, soil samples were drawn in a grid of 2.5 hectare in irrigated 
area and in 10 hectare in rain fed area with the help of GPS tools and revenue map. So, one 
sample was collected per 2.5 hectare of irrigated area and one sample was col lected for p er 
10 hectare in the rain fed area. And in this way, the soil health card scheme covered all the 
states and union territories in India.  
Now, the state government generally collected samples to the staff of the Department of 
Agriculture or t hrough the staff of an outsource agency. So, there are different outsource 
agencies and the state government also involved the students of local agriculture and science 
colleges for collecting the samples and analyzing the samples. Now, soil samples are taken  
generally 2 times in a year after harvesting of rabi crop or winter crop and kh arif crop or 
rainy season crop respectively or when there is no standing crop in the field. So, this is how 
the soil samples have been collected for the soil health card scheme .  (Refer Slide Time: 7:34)  
 
So, soil samples are collected by a trained person from a depth of 15 to 20 centimeter by 
cutting the soil in a V shape. We have already discussed in our previous week lectures that 
how to collect these V shaped for a slice . It is to be collected from four corners and the center 
of the field and mix thoroughly and part of these picked up as a sample I have already told 
you how we can collect the samples and then how we can make a composite sample from 
multiple samples and the n how we can do the quartering method to reduce the sample size.  
Remember that areas with shade have to be avoi ded. The sample choosing are bagg ed and 
coded and transferred to soil test laboratory for the analysis. Now, the question comes where 
the soils are being analyzed. The soil samples are tested as per the approved standards for all 
the agreed  12 parameters in the following  way. First of all , at the soil testing labs owned by 
the Department  of Agriculture by their own sta ff and at the soil testing la b owned by the 
Department of Agriculture but the staff of the outsourced agency and at the soil test 
laboratories owned by the outsourced agency by their staff.  
And at Indian Council of A gricultural Research Institution including Krishi Vigyan Kendra 
and State Agriculture Universities. So at the laboratories of  the science also at the 
laboratories of the science colleges or universities by the students under supervision of a 
professor or a scientist. So, these are the places where we can get these soil sam ples tested 
after collecting.  (Refer Slide Time: 9:30)  
 
Now, the next question comes to our mind how the quality of the soil test is ensured ? So the 
state government refer 1  percent  of the sample in a year to a referral  laboratory to analyze and 
certif y on the results of primary laboratory. The state government helps to establish also 
referral laboratories as required.  
So, next question comes to our mind what is the payment per sample ? What is the cost for 
analyzing one sample? So, an Indian rupee s of 190 per sample was generally provided to 
state government by the federal government or central government. And these covers the cost 
of collection of soil sample its test, generation  and distribution of soil health  card to the 
farmer.  
And what is the tota l outlay of the scheme we wi ll see in a minute the number of total soil 
health card which were distributed, but the total outlay of the scheme is rupees 568.54 crore 
for a period of 3 years and the scheme has been rolled out in the field during 2015 to 16.  And 
there are 2 phases first phase and second phase then we  will see the details in a minute.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:58 )  
 
Apart from that, there is another program called Model Village Problem. So, it is a pilot 
project that is development of model vil lages is also being implemented by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmer s Welfare in the financial year 2019 and 20. So, please note that this 
project is different from the Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana or SAGY which was launched in 
October 2014 with the goa l of developing the socio economic and physical infrastructure of 
the villagers.  
Now, what do you mean by a development of model villages. So, under this project, a model 
village is selected for aggregation of soil samples and analysis of each agricultura l holding 
and the program promotes farm holding based soil sample collection and testing with 
farmer’s  participation. So, this is in a nutshell this model village program.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:06)   
 
So, if you go to the website of the soil health card,  you will see that the advi sories  are given 
and the major objectives of soil health card program is to provide the information to farmers 
on nutrient status of their soil. And it also provides recommendation on appropriate dosage of 
fertilizers to be appli ed for improving the soil health.  
And remember that the soil health card based n utrient application promotes balance d and 
judicious use of nutrients and that is why there has been a decline of chemical fertilizers you 
use. So,  it also the soil health card program also promotes integrated nutrient management 
which results in reduced consumption of chemical fertilizer we have already covered that and 
application of fertilizer based on soil health card recommendation avoids under or excessive 
use of fertilize r and thereby it increases the profit.  
Now you can go and farmers can register or farmers can get more information regarding the 
soil health card scheme in the following websites I  am going to show you and also there is a 
website , there is a website where  you can calculate the fertilizer dose based on the soil health 
card recommendations.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:45 )  
 
So, if we go and see the websites, so, this is the website of that soil health card, and you can 
see that all the details are being mention ed here and the current status are being mentioned. 
We can see there are 2 cycles of the scheme cycle 1 and cycle 2 and in the cycle one the 
target for samples collection and testing was 2,53,49,554  and target for printing and 
distribution of soil health c ard was around 10 crore and but these are the actual scenarios.  
So actually 2,53,4 9,546 samples were collected and 2,88,00,000  samples were registered. So, 
2,53,00,000  samples were tested and test results enter for 2,52,00,000 total soil  health  cards 
printed were 10 crore around 10 cr ore and farmers entered were 8 crore and so and dispatch, 
soil health card dispatched  10 crore and soil health cards on portal is around 5 crore. So, you 
can see that this is the first phase and the second phase target for sam ple collection and 
testing is around 2,72,19,794 and these are the current status . Apart from that this model 
village program status is also given here.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:34 )  
 
So, anybody can go and see the current status and farmers can track their  samples. So, they 
can track their sample the status of their sample testing, they can print their soil health card 
and they can also print soil card for additional crops and they can calculate the fertilizer 
dosage for crops and they can also look at soil  testing laboratory nearby to their place . And 
also in the soil head dashboard and scheme progress if you click on the scheme progress . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:59 )  
  
You can get and current scenario of what is the progress of the scheme and what are the 
target what is actually the sample collected and samples tested and state  wise you can also get 
the information.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:17)   
  
So, for model village program for soil health card program, you wi ll get all the information 
for also you can ge t the state  wise progress. So, you here you can see the state  wise progress 
of the of the second cycle of soil health card program.  
So, these websites are pretty much useful for generating the soil health card and these are 
very user friendly and farmers c an download their soil health card from this website. So, this 
is the soil health card.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:18)  
 
 Now, also there is a link for fertilizer dosage calculation. So, if we just go to that website and 
see what is there ? So, this is the web site where you can calculate your fertilizer based on the 
report of the soil health card.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:25)   
 
  
So, you can you can select the state. So, suppose we are selecting the state of Andhra Pradesh 
and then you can put all the values o f for example, let us put the value of 0.3  percent  organic 
carbon and then available nitrogen suppose 400 kg and available phosphorus suppose, we 
have 40 kg and no suppose 30 kg and then available potassium let us assume it is  150 kg.  
So, if you click con tinue, okay, we have to select the district also. So if we select the East 
Godavari district and continue then it will open up other options . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:14 )  
  
 
  
 
Like which crops we want to go with. So if we click on the cereal , and then  we can click on 
the paddy , rice, and then any variety and then season and if you hit calculate, you will get all 
the fertilizer recommendation. So here they  are recommending that you should use the neem  
coated urea of 130 kg per hectare, then single super  phosphate of 250 kg per hectare based on 
these hypothetical values and potassium chloride and also there are 2 types of fertilizer 
recommendation one with neem coated urea and other also with another combination where 
DAP neem  coated urea and m uriate  of potash is given in here neem  coated urea single super 
phosphate and potassium chloride or muriate  potash is given. So, these are based on the 
major m icronutrient.  (Refer Slide Time: 19:14 )  
 
 
So, if you want t o go with the micronutrients sugges tion also so, here you can put all the 
information regarding the pH, EC, and the available micronutrients and you will get the 
micronutrient based advisory also. So, these are very useful website which you can use for 
calculating or farmers can use to calculate thei r fertilizer recommendation for their area for 
their particular crop and their variety and they can get judicious fertilizer application 
prescription and they can thereby increase their yield. So this is how this soil health card 
scheme basically works.  (Refer Slide Time: 19:54)   
 
Now the question is why we go for the new scheme. So here you can see that the partial 
factor  productivity is declining with each passing year. So, as we are going through these 
intensive cultivations  we will see that the partia l factor  productivity or yield  versus 
application of nutrient is quite going down and also we can see there is a continuous decline 
in organic matter status and in Indian soil  and also we can see that there are emerging nutrient 
deficiencies with the passa ge of time.  
So, in 1950 there was only nitrogen deficiency however, in 2020 to 2025 you can see that 
there are multiple elements which are becoming deficient in Indian soils. So, as a result, this 
scheme is indispensable for maintaining or sustaining the soil fertility status specifically in 
Indian soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:07)  
 
  
Now, what are the soil tests are required for assessing the soil health. So, of course, we can 
collect the representative soil sample collection and then we can sample the yo u can dry the 
samples and handle the samples and process the samples and then we can check the lab 
accuracy by again also we can measure using different types of methods and we can compare 
their accuracy and based on that we can interpret the lab values an d soil test values.  
And based on these recommendation, based on the soil test values we can give this 
recommendation or soil test crop response recommendation or STC recommendation. And 
not only these STC R takes the help from the soil test results, but al so it considers the previous 
crop and intended crop and then it generates a particular action . 
And where it recommends a particular action then, we have to take care of cropping history 
and legume credits, also the late spring nitrate test, then manu re and compost cr edits  and 
organic matter levels all these will be considered for giving the proper recommendation of 
management practices. So, soil test is very much necessary for maintaining the soil health.  (Refer Slide Time: 22:35 )  
 
So, th ese flowchart a lso gives the step by step, how these farmer can assess their soil health 
by the soil health card scheme . So, the farmers can send the samples to the agriculture 
supervisor assistant agriculture officer and they can give the sample to the Krishi Vigyan 
Kendra or agriculture university and the re we do the people do the soil testing laboratory at 
district level and then they send then they generate this fertilizer  recommendation and 
information for specific site and this thing can be accessed by the farmer and he can get these 
results from there.  
And also based on these soil test values or soil tests  soil health card recommendation, they 
can apply the right quantity of fertilizer and menu to the soil test basis and thereby they can 
increase their profit by sa ving money and maintaining the soil health and environmental and 
ensuring the environmental protection. So, this chart or this flowchart gives the overview of 
the benefit of soil health card scheme. So, the farmers can either give the soil health soil 
samp le to the agriculture supervisor or assistant agriculture officer or they can directly give 
the sample to the testing place and they can get the recommendation for their particular crop 
and for their location.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:12 ) 
 
  
So, basically i f we see that soil health card is a printed report that a farmer will be handed 
over for each of his holding s. It will contain the status of all these 12 parameters and also it 
will contain the fertilizer  recommendation and soil we will get the proper judi cious fertilizer 
doses. So here you can see here, this is how the soil health card looks like.  
So here you can see the test values are given for all the 12 parameters and their interpretation 
are al so given. So here you can see te st value is 6.39 so the r ating is ac idic. And also here EC 
is 0.37 deci siemens  per meter so it is normal. So, based on these ratings are basically given 
here and you can see the all the details of the farmers and then their address , mobile,  gender , 
category and all these details a nd soil sample depth and soil sample details are also being 
mentioned . (Refer Slide Time: 25:22 )  
 
And how the farmer can use the soil health card now, this card will contain an advisory based 
on the s oil nutrient status of a farmer’ s holding. So, it wil l show the recommendation on 
dosage of different nutrients needed. So, further it will also advise the farmers on the 
fertilizers and their quantities he should apply and also the soil amendments that he should 
undertake or so as to realize the optimal nee ds.  
So here you can see in the soil health card, not only we get the soil test values and their 
interpretation, but also will get the fertilizer recommendation just like I have showed you in 
the website, we can calculate the fertilizer recommendation in d ifferent combinations. So, 
similarly in the soil health card also, we are going to get the different combination of soil of 
the fertilizer recommendation using the soil test values.  
So, the soil health card will contain not only the soil health test values  and their 
interpretation, but also it will contain the fertilizer recommendation also.  (Refer Slide Time: 26:38 )  
 
So, what are the different components of the soil health of course, if we consider soil health is 
an interaction between environmental qu ality, animal health or human health, soil 
productivity and food quality or safety . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:52 )  
 
And soil health basically links between the strategy of alternative agriculture and ultimate 
goal of sustainable agriculture. So, if you see th e different strategies that they are like 
alternative agriculture , scale management, crop rotation, organic recycling , residue chemical 
input, crop livestock systems, integrated pest management, so, these are very popular words 
nowadays in the agriculture domain.  So, the soil health basically links between the strategy and the goal. So, our goals are 
sustainable agriculture, productive or profitable, agriculture, energy conservation, 
environmental protection, economic, production and the conservation of na tural resources 
and improve health food quality safety. So, the soil health basically maintains the link 
between the strategy and the goal, if the soil health is not maintained, then this goal will not 
be realized.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:54 )  
 
So, the man agement strategies for soil health maintenance and improvement you can see that 
soil health are basically chemical , it can be considered as a complex interplay between 
chemical , physical , biological properties. And you can see that these are different 
mana gement strategies for maintaining or improving the soil health  like crop rotation, cover 
cropping, diversity production, organic amendment , integrating livestock then diverse plant 
species, then sustainable grazing then also the reduction of soil disturban ces. These are 
different management practices or strategies for attaining or improving the proper soil health  
or maintaining the soil health.  (Refer Slide Time: 28:46 )  
 
Agriculture management practices and soil health you can see that you have to choose  the 
practice that feed the soil organisms and protect their habitat. So  no till or conservation 
tillage , cover crops, rel ay cro ps, diversity in crop rotation, perennial crops, organic fertilizer 
use, crop residue retention all these are different strategi es for maintaining the habitat of soil 
microorganisms to maintain the soil health . 
However, there are different types of negative or deleterious or hazardous process which can 
reduce the soil health like broad spectrum herbicide , excessive crop residue removal,  
excessive inorganic fertilizers use , annual crop , mono cropping and so on so forth.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:33 )  
 So, soil health evaluation system at research level if we see that then first we have to 
determine what is the human need ? And then from  there, we have to see the interaction 
between soil health connotation and farmland utilization and management. And then we have 
to determine at 2 levels in the first stage we have to determine the functional soil 
management and then we have to identify th e primary productivity , water purification and 
regulations and then provision and cycling of nutrients, carbon sequestration , provision of 
functional intrinsic biodiversity.  
When we identify all these factors then we can characterize like different types o f physical, 
chemical and biological factors. So, these are called indicators, which we are going to discuss 
in our upcoming for estimating the soil quality. So, there are physical indicators , chemical 
indicators, and biological i ndicators subsoil . So, we c an analyze them we can collect the data 
and also at the same time, we should also determine the soil t hreat  and stresses  and what are 
the hazard indicators, which produce different types of soil stresses and soil disturbances.  
So, we also should collect t he data and then we do the indicator evaluation and then we 
determine the indicator weights and then we construct the evaluation model and based on this 
evaluation model, we should identify the research area, we should also recognize the obstacle 
and final ly, we could also do the data verification. So, this is the framework of soil health 
evaluation at the research level.  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:16 )  
 
Now, the next question comes to our mind what is soil quality ? Now, soil quality is the 
capacity of the soi l to function and the soil quality index helps to assess the soil quality of a given site or ecosystem and enables comparisons between condition at plot , field or 
watershed level under different land uses and management practices.  
So, soil quality is a ve ry important concept and soil scientists have developed different 
methods to identify and quantify the soil quality index using different methods to assess the 
soil capacity , soils capacity to function. So, we are going to wrap up our lecture here and in 
the next lecture, we are going to discuss more about this soil quality and how we can 
calculate the soil quality index using different methods, how to do the scoring what are the 
different indicators and also what are the MDS and all these different approac hes and also we 
are going to learn what is soil resilience, what are the what are the methods of soil resilience  
assessment in our next lecture. S o, let us wrap up our lecture here and let us meet in our next 
lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:47 )  
  
But, t hese are some of the … I just want to show real quick these are some of the references of 
this lecture. And you can go through these references to get more information, but, we are 
going to discuss the soil quality and calculation of the soil quality index in more details in our 
upcoming lecture. Thank you very much. Let us  meet you in our next lecture.  