Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture  43 
Fertilizer Quality Control, Fertilizer Adulteration and Fertilizer Testing (Contd.)  
Welcome friends  to this lecture number 43 of NPTE L online certification course  of Soil 
Fertility  and Fertilizers . In this week we are discussing about fertilizer quality control, 
fertilizer adulteration and fertilizer testing. Now, in the previous lectur es we have  discussed 
about slow release fertilizer , controlled release  fertilizers ; and also we have discussed about 
the customized  fertilizers. In the last lecture we have discussed mostly on customized 
fertilizer;  what are the requirements of customized  fertilizer s? How the  customize d fertilizer  
can meet the crop requirement of a particular place ? 
And how why farmers prefer the customized  fertilizer ? What are the process of making the 
customized fertilizers we have already discussed. Now, we are going to discuss so me of the 
other aspects of fertilizer quality , and some other aspects of fertilizer quality control , and 
fertilizer testing in this lecture. Now , in this lecture the following concepts which we are 
going to cover . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:22)  
  
Bio-release  smart micronutrients , and then fortified fertilizer containing micronutrient . We 
are going to learn about novel micronutrient formulations, then plan t growth  promoter as 
biostimulants , and fortified zinc and boron fertilizers. So, these are some of the co ncepts 
which we are going to cover in this lecture. These are some of the keywords of this lecture 
fortified fertilizers , novel micronutrients, plant growth promoter, water soluble fertilizer s, and 
FCO specifications.  So, these are some of the keywords whi ch we are going to disc uss in 
details in this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:02)  
 
Now, let us first discuss  bio-release  smart micronutrient. So, bio-release  smart ferti lizer is a 
new category of slow release fertilizer. We already know what is slow releas e fertilizer. Slow 
release fertilizer is a fertilizer that is release the  plant available form of fertilizer or nutrient in a very controlled or slow manner. So, that we can increase the fertilizer use efficiency , and 
we can ensure the particular nutrient in the soil for the ex tended period of time. Now, bio -
release smart ferti lizer is a new category of slow release fertilizer . Molecules designed in this 
bio-release smart micronutrients. t he molecules are designed so that the nutrient release is 
governed by  organic acids secreted by plants and microbes . 
You know that in the soil , in the rhizosphere the plant roots generally the y release some of 
the exudate s or organic acids , which can react with these molecules to release the nutrients in 
a controlled manner . So, not only these organic acids are secreted by the plants, but also these 
organic acids are secreted by the microbes. So, these micronutrient formulation so these 
micronutrient fertiliz ers, the release of these micronutrient  in the plant available form  is 
dependent on its reaction with the acids secreted by the plants and microbes. Now, the 
fertilizer effectively acts as a store from which crops can extract nutrient as and when they 
need it.  
And they mimic , so basically what happens ? So, the fertilizer generally effectively acts as a 
store and , and crops can extract these nutrients when they need  by these by by the by t hese 
kind of reactions.  So, the mimic,  they mimic the natural form of nutrients in soil , and nutrient  
release is under the control of the  plant itself. So , generally these reaction mimic the natural 
form of nutrients in soil . And nutrient release from these molecules is under the control of the 
plant itself ; because , the nutrient release is dependent on the reaction which is mediated by 
the plant root exudates , or organic aci ds secreted by the plant roots.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:53)  
 Now, what are the raw materials ? So, for these by for these bio-release  smart micronu trients, 
the raw materials are  phosphoric acid ; and (wish ) we should have a lso the micronutrients 
source . What are the mitochondrial source like zinc oxide, iron ore fines, iron oxides, 
manganese carbonate, copper carbonate , boric acid , and molybdenum trioxide; s o, these are 
the raw materials. Apart from that there are some bases  for neutralization ; what are those 
bases ? Magnesia , lime, ammonia;  so, these are the bases wh ich are there as raw materials.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:34)  
 
Now, let us see some examples. So, if we consider the polymer coated bio-release nutrients . 
So, we can  see NPK with traces of micronutrients ; and we can apply them for home garden s, 
turfs and golf courses . And applicability is basically customize d for soil and crop ty pes. If 
they are  zeolite based , we can have NPK with traces of micronutrients. We can also  apply 
them in the golf course , flower , turfs et -cetera ; and they are basically for non -commercial 
crops. Then , gel based formulations are there , fertilizers are there, which are basically NPK 
with traces of micr onutrients.  
They are basically applied for a vailable for agricultural crops , nursery ; and they are 
customized for soil and crop types , different soil and crop types.  Frits or glasses , they are 
basically mixtur e micronutrients plus phosphate.  Their market is very limited mainly for 
boron, some other market is there ; and they are applicable in sandy soils . And oxides are 
there which contain mainly the micronutrients ; they are mainly for zinc for long term 
treatment , and basically they are useful for acidic s oils. So, these are some of the 
formulations which are available . And nutrients, y ou my have discussed the nutrients , 
markets , and applicability. You can see most of them are available for a home gardens , golf course , and flowers , and agricultural crops.  And howeve r the fr its or the glasses are ve ry; 
their availability  in the market is very limited.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:21)  
 
Now, let us see some novel micronutrient  formulations. Now, we know that conventional 
micronutrient products sometimes lead to loss of money and unnecessary build  up of metal in 
soil. And they can also lead to widespread heavy met al toxicity and contamination; b oth for 
plant and microbes in soil. So, novel micronutrient formulations are aimed to improve 
nutrient efficiency factor. For example, let us discuss zinc polyphosphate f or soil application . 
Now, zinc poly phosphate , we have 21 percent  zinc, 18 percent  phosphorus , and 9 percent  
nitrogen . And here zinc a s a cross linker in polyphosphate chain along with magnesium to 
make it insoluble. So, in this zinc polyphosphate , zinc acts  as a cross linker in the 
polyphosphate chain and;  and render it in insoluble in nature.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:23)  
  
Now, acidic  metabolites, what are the acidic metabolites? When there are different types of 
acidic  metabolites exudates , exudated  by the by the roots of the plant; s o, when they are 
secreted by the plant root , these are organic chemicals, these are organic molecules.  So, they 
act as chelate , and they can bind these zinc cation  from polyphosphate chain  to make it 
slowly available. Now, the e xtent of metabolic activity indirectly controls the rate of release 
and uptake. So, these as the metabolic activity will increase , the acidic metabolites will be 
released ; and they will acts as a chelating agent or ligand for chelating the zinc , and then i t 
will be available to the plant.  
So, so  this is how the these , these micronutrient  specific micronutrie nt formulation basically 
works. N ow, let us see zinc nano -silica for foliar application. Now, using zinc oxide 
nanoparticles as zinc fertilizer may incr ease zinc dissolution and soil bioavailability due to 
their higher reactivity. So, what happens when you apply the zinc oxide nanoparticle as zinc 
fertilizer ? They can increase the zinc dissolution and zinc availability to the plants ; because 
the zinc oxid e nanoparticles have higher reactivity. Chemical and  biological methods can also 
synth esize zinc oxide nanoparticles.  
Since , chemical methods required toxic chemicals, biological methods are becoming more 
popular . Now, let us see how they do that.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:08)  
 
Now, for  the synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles , an appropriate concentration of either zinc 
sulfate heptahydrate , or the zinc acetate is dissolved in water. Now, apart from that plant leaf , 
we need plant leaf extract. So, plant lea f extract can be prepared in solvents such as water , 
ethanol or methanol. Now, these zinc oxide nanoparticles are synthesized by mixing the plant 
extract which you have already prepared in water , ethanol , or methanol ; and zinc sulfate 
heptahydrate or zinc acetate solution at desired pH . Now , nano -silica helps easier penetration 
through leaf  cuticle on foliar spray.  
So, this is how these particular zinc nano -silica formulation is developed for foliar 
application ; remember this is for foliar application . And since nano -silica is there , it helps in 
easy penetration through  leave cuticle during the foliar  application.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:11)  
 
Now, the zinc oxide nanoparticles have been tested in the laboratory as bactericide and 
fungicide  such as Staphylococ cus aureus, Bacillus subtilis, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. So, 
you can see here , first of all we are extracting the plant e xtract; s o, this is a plant extract 
solution . And then we are mixing it with the metal salt solution like silver , then the gold,  then 
copper , zinc et -cetera;  and then we can see the the nanoparticles there . So, nanoparticle 
formula formulations are there, and these nanoparticles will act as a source of the nutrients . 
So, this is how these zinc oxid e nanoparticles basically work.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:59)  
 
Now, let us discuss plant gr owth promoter as biostimulants. N ow, enhance crop growth, 
improve nutrient availability , and encourage soil microbial activity ; these three are the major objectives of plant growth promoter. Now, growth pr omoters basically boost the all -round 
development of the crops by regulating their metabolic activities from the root to  the leaves. 
So, growth promoter  basically help  in the development of the crops by (reveal ) by regulating 
their metabolic activities. Natu ral growth promoters include predominantly seaweed extract, 
organic acids, growth hormones, enzymes, amino acids, humic acid and fulvic acid , and 
beneficial microbes.  
So, when these beneficial microbes are there in the soil, they enhance the nutrient 
avail ability ; and as a result , they can also improve the metabolic activities  for better growth 
of the crop.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:07)  
 
So, let us also discuss the fortified fertilizers. Now, definition of fortified  fertilizer is, it is a 
specially designed mi xed fertilizer to which  another fertilizer or more than one fertilizer 
compound , containing plant nutrient is deliberately added to enhance the nutrient value of the 
fertilizer. Usually , secondary nut rients like sulph ur and micronutrients like zinc, boron and 
molybdenum are usually fortified with the common straight fertilizer. Why we applied the 
fortified fertilizers ? So, the advantage of fortification is that small amounts of micronutrients 
recommended can uniformly be applied over the field with ease . 
Some fertilizer elements like boron which are required in very small quantity; n ow, it is 
difficult for the farmers to apply them . And physical application of those boron fertilizers  in 
such a small quantity in a large area is always problematic. So , it is a lways better to use it as a 
fortified fertilizer , where it can physically mix with straight fertilizer and then apply 
uniformly. So , that is the major advantage of this fortification . (Refer Slide Time: 14:20)  
 
Now, fortified  fertilizer containing micronu trients. You can see some lists of fertilizer 
notified under the fertilizer control order Schedule -1A. Boronated single superphosphate is 
there,  zincated  urea is there,  zincated  phosphate in the suspension form,  then zincated  NPK 
10; sorry,  12, 32, 16, 0.5. then, zincated  NPK 10 , 26, 26, 0.5; boronated DAP  18, 46, 0, 0.3. 
Boronated NPK 10 , 26, 26, 0.3; calcium nitrate with boron,  we can see 15 , 15, 15, 0.2. And 
then DAP with 0.5 percent  zinc; and single super phosphate with zero point zincated single 
super phosphate we can see here.  
So, these are some of the fortified fertilizer which con tain the micronutrient element.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:19)  
 
Now, let us see some fortified zinc and boron fertilizer. Now , regarding the subsidies on the 
value of these ferti lizers, the government has clearly announced that any variant of the 
phosphorus and potassium fertilizer covered under the Nutrient Based S ubsidy policy, if 
fortified or coated with boron and zinc as provided under FCO is eligible for subsidy. So , 
whatever  phosphate or potassium fertilizer are subsidized by the government, if they are 
fortified or coated by boron or zing , they will also eligible for subsidy. Now , such fortified or 
coated fertilizer will attract an additional per tonne subsidy to encourage t heir applicati on and 
primary nutrients.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:09)  
 Now, let us see some FCO  specification on some fortified fertilizer. So , first of all is 
boron ated single super phosphate ; you can see 16 percent  P2O5 powdered . So, mixture  
percentage  by we ight maximum should be 12 percent . Free phosphoric acid as P2O5 percent 
by weight , maximum should be 4 percent . Water Soluble P2 O5 as percent weight , minimum 
will be 16 percent . Boronate boron, percent  by weight sho uld be varying from 0.15 to 0.2 
percent . Zincated urea m oisture percentage by weight, m aximum should be 1 percent . Total 
nitrogen percent by weight on dry basi s, minimum should be 43 percent.  
Zinc, percent by weight , minimum should be 2 percent . Biuret  percent by weig ht, maximum 
will be 1.5 perce nt. Particle  size- should be not less than 90 percent  of the material shall pass 
through  2.8 millimeters sieve;  and not less than 80 percent  by weight shall be retained on 1 
millimeter  sieve . So, these are the specification by the FCO for this boronated SS P, which has 
16 percent  P2O5. And also we have , it has percent  by weight 0.15 , 0.2, 0.20 percent; and for 
zincated urea which contains zinc of 2 percent.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:35)  
 
Now , also FC O specification for NPK complex fertilizer fortified with boro n 10, 26, 26, 0.3; 
we can see maximum weight percentage of moisture  should be 1 percentage, (maxim)  
minimum weight percentage of total nitrogen should be 10 percentage . Minimum weight 
percentage of ammonical  nitrogen should be 7 percent; minimum, maximum p ercent by 
weight of urea nitrogen should be 3  percent.  And minimum percent of weight of neutral 
ammonium citrate soluble P2O5 should be 26 percent ; minimum percent  by weight by water 
soluble phosphate should be 22  percent.  Minimum percent  by weight of wa ter soluble potash should be 26 percent;  and minimum 
boron per centage by weight should be 0.3 percent . Particle  size should be not less than 90  
percent  of the material shall be between 1 millimeter and 4 millimeter sieve;  and not more 
than 5  percent  shall be  below 1 millimeter sieve.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:36)  
 
Now, let us discuss water solu ble fertilizers. Water soluble f ertilizers are extremely 
convenient to use as their pre -mixed with salts and can be simply sprayed on plants. Now, 
water soluble f ertilizer s are generally used in sprinkler or drip irrigation system and foliar 
sprays to increase the yield , and improve the product quality. So, generally we apply the 
foliar spray in the standing crop  to increase their yield. W ater soluble fertilizers are 
introd uced in India way back in the late 1990s till 2005 ; their usage was restricted in 
Maharashtra . By 2011, their use usage  has spread to Gujarat , Madhya Pradesh , Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu , and Karnataka.  
From 2011 onwards , many of the other northern states s tarted adopting t hese water soluble 
fertilizers.  (Refer Slide Time: 19:34)  
 
Now , what are the benefits of foliar application or foliar fertilization? There are five major 
benefits of foliar fertilization.  Higher resistance to disease and pest;  foliar app lication can 
help in improve d improving the drought tolerance. It can also help s in improving the soil 
salinity tolerance . Foliar  application can produce higher resistance to physiological disorders ; 
and foliar application can help in rapid utilization of applied nutrients , and therefore rapid 
corre ction of observed deficiencies.  So, these are the benefits of foliar application.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:15)  
 
Now , in India , water soluble fertilizer can be broadly classified into two categories. First of 
all, 100 percent  water soluble complex fertilizers ; and this includes grades like c alcium 
nitrate, boronated calcium nitrate, mono ammonium phosphate ; and then mono potassium phosphate , and then potassium nitrate and urea phosphate. So, you can see mono ammonium  
phosphate has 12  61, 0; mono  potassium phosphate at 0, 52, 34; potassium nitrate has 13, 0, 
45; and urea phosphate has 17 , 45, 44, 0. So, these are the grades.  So, in India , we have 100 
percent  water soluble complex fertilizers ; this is one category . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:02)  
 
Another category is  100 percent  water soluble mixture of fertilizers. So, the FCO general 
guidelines issued in 2015 state that  for any product to be considered in this category , it must 
adhere  to the following general specification.  So, total primary nutrient with secondary 
nutrients , and or, so it must have total primary nutrients with secondary nutrient. What are 
these sulfur, calcium, magnesium and or some micronutrients like zinc, boron, molybdenum, 
iron, copper, zinc, boron, man ganese, iron, copper molybdenum, which contains three 
primary nutrients which are not less than 35 units . 
Percent by weight and minimum should be 40  percent . And two primary nutrient  not less than 
25 units ; and percent  by weight minimum should be 30  percen t. So, these are the categories , 
these are the conditions of micronutrients for this 100 percent  water soluble mixture of 
fertilizers . (Refer Slide Time: 22 :09) 
 
And another option is there , all the followin g condition must be fulfilled; t his is third op tion. 
None  of the pri mary nutrients included in the  WSF  grade is less than 5  percent  of my total 
weight. None of the secondary nutrients included in the WSF  grade is less than 2  percent  of 
the total weight. None of the micronutrients included in the WS F grade except for b oron, 
molybdenum in less than 1  percent  of the total weight . And boron and molybdenum included 
shall not exceed 1  percent  of the total weight. So , these are the other conditions which must 
be fulfilled for the third  option.  
(Refer Slide Tim e: 22:46)  
 
So, if we see the tre nd of water soluble fertilizer  market growth in India from 2000 to 2020 , 
we can see that the the market growth has increased tremendously from 7.5 thousand  metric tonne million , 7 point thousand  million ton ns to 300 thousan d million ton ns in India. And so, 
so that shows and very high increase in the market of water soluble fertilizers. So, guys in 
this this , in this  lecture, we have covered some very important concepts . We have covered the 
plant growth  promoters, we have cov ered fortified fertilizers ; we have seen their benefits, we 
have s een some fortified fertilizers.  
We have also seen the water soluble fertilizer , their categories , FCO  specifications ; and also 
we have seen biologically released micronutrients are biologica lly controlled release  
micronutrients we have seen . And all these are basically utilized , or in India for improving 
the fertilizer use efficiency , and fertilizer use efficiency ; and also to improve the crop yield to 
correct instantaneously correcting the p roblems in the crop, five foliar application. So, these 
are some of the ways through which these type of fertilizers  can help in in improving the soil 
fertility as  well as the soil productivity.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:41)  
 
So, guys, we  have wrapped up this  lecture; t hese are some of the references of this lecture . 
And in the next lecture , we will  be discussing about direct benefit transfer in the in the in case 
of in case of fertilizers. S o, so far in  this in this week that is week 9; for these three past 
lectures we have discussed the slow  release fertilizers controlled release  fertilizers. W e have 
discussed these water soluble fertilizers and so on. So, please go through these fertilizers and 
there are plenty of references avail able in the in the website.  
And you can you can consult these sources , so that you can enrich yourself with more 
inform ation regarding the fertilizers. F ertilizers are very important for boosting the 
productivity , specifically in Indian condition where there is a continuous shrinkage  of natural resources or agricultural land , and continuous increase in population. So, we must select the 
best management practice as well as the best fertilizer combination ; so, that w e can reduce 
the cost of inputs.  We can improve the soil fertility;  we can enhance the soil productivity. So, 
let us wrap up here guys.  
Let us meet in our next lecture t o discuss more about how government of India has 
promulgated different policies ; and what are the provisions they have made for better 
distribution of fertili zer subsidy for Indian farmers. Thank you very much ; let us meet in our 
next lecture . 