Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 41 
Fertilizer Quality Control, Fertilizer Adulteration and Fertilizer Testing   
Welcome friends  to this new lecture of week  9 of NPTEL  online certification course of Soil 
Fertility a nd Fertilizers . In our previous week, we have discussed about different aspects of 
organic as well as inorganic fertilizers. We have discussed in details about the manuf acturing 
process, we have discussed several important fertilizer terms;  we have discussed how to 
calculate the fertilizer requirement. So, in this week we are going to focus on fertilizer quality 
control, fertilizer adul teration and fertilizer testing.  
How  we can control our fertilizer  quality?  How  we c an check the fertilizer quality? H ow we 
can test our fertilizer and how we can, what are the what are the ways through which fertilizer 
alteration are going , fertilizer can be adulterated ? And how to test the fertilizer we are going 
to discuss in this week. But , before that we are also interested to know about the fertilizer 
consumption status of the world as well as in India. We want to see what is the present issues 
of fertilizer application ; what are the wa ys to mitigate those problems? And also we are going 
to see some important fertilizer terms like slow release fertilizer,  controlled release fertilizer.  
What are the ir uses we are also going to discuss ? Why th ey are important given the soil, soil 
condition s? I mean there are different types of soil conditions and according to those 
variation of the soil properties, what are the important factors we should keep in mind while 
applying the fertilizers?  We are also going to discuss in this week. So, our first l ecture that is 
lecture number 41 will focus on this following concepts . (Refer Slide Time: 02:50)  
 
So, current fertilizer or fertility scenario , and then split applications of nitrogenous fertilizers 
and its drawback . And slow and controlled release fert ilizer , then differentiation between 
slow release and controlled release fertilizers  and working mechanism of polymer coated 
fertilizers. So, these are the concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:28)  
 
These are some of the keywords like split nitrogen application, slow release fertilizer , 
controlled release fertilizer, stabilized nitrogen fertilizer , and then polymer coated fertilizers . 
So, these are some of the keywords of this lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 03:45)  
 
So, fertilizer application has initiated a huge progress in agriculture  and that is why probably 
fertilizer revolu tion and fertilizer based increase in  production has been termed as g olden 
revolution . And subsequently fertilizer is called as a golden  molecule . To improve the 
fertility of the soil and to increase the productivity , fertilizer has played a big role  and which 
is undeniably very, we cannot we cannot deny its role. So, but we have to see the current 
status of fertilize r worldwide as well as in India;  whether their consumption increase in 
consumption has increase in pro ductivity continuously or not, o r is th ere any other trends 
available?  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:01)  
 Now, if we see these worldwide NPK fertilizer s use; that is this is remember that this is the 
scenario of subsidized fertilizer used for agriculture from the year 2000 to 2019 in kg per 
hectare. You can see the countries which are having the highe st fertilizer subsidy are China; 
then you can see US or United St ates, and then Brazil, India. S o, these are the countries 
where the use of subsidized fertilizer has been very high as compared to th e other countries of 
the world.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:59)  
 
Now, if you want to see the total global NPK use in million tones  and total  crop production in  
million ton es. From 2000 to 2019 , you can see that there has been a steady increase in total 
production. Also we can see there has been a steady increase in NPK use  that is NP and K 
fertilizer use in million tones  from 2000 y ear 2000 to 2019.  (Refer Slid e Time: 06:34)  
 
Now, also, from the Indian perspective, you see the annual nitrogen fertilizer consumption 
together with the annual GDP of  India and population of India. You can see that a s there is an 
increase in GDP, t here is also an increase in nitroge n fertilizer consumption and also we can 
see there is a  steady increase in population.  So, it might be due to steady increase of 
population may may lead to higher production requirement  and as a result, there may be 
higher nitrogen fertilizer consumption . And also maybe that lead to that leads to higher GDP . 
So, this is a condition of fertilizer consumption in India, specifically nitrogenous fertilizer . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:39)  
 
However, if we consider the overall scenario of the wor ld, and if you conside r the 
consumption of fertilizer NPK fertilizer ; that means all the major micronutrients I mean primary nutrients N, P and K , their fertil izer consumption from 1970 to  2010. And you can 
see also, you can if you if you check the partial factor productivity ; that means kg of grain per 
kg of NPK applied. You can see there is a, there is an opposite trend. A s you can see here 
from 1970 to 2010 , as the fertilizer NPK consumption is continuously increasing . 
The partial factor productivity that means, the kg of gra in per kg of NPK applied is 
continuously diminishing. So, that means continuous use of this fertilizer can cause a 
deleterious effect in the natural productivity of the soil. And as a result, the kg of produce per 
kg of fertilizer consumption has gone down  for last from 1970 to 2010.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:19)  
 
Now, if you see the current fertilizer or fertility scenario, you can see that fertilizer and its use 
is highly skewed ; fertilizer use is highly skewed and imbalance d specifically in Indian 
condition . We can see deficiency of multiple micronutr ients are widespread in India  and the 
availability of the fertilizers are also quite inadequate. We can also see the lower efficiency of 
fertilizer elements , and then declining crop response ratio , and declining  yields a nd lack of 
nutrient management.  So, these are the major problems as far as the as far as  the Indian soil 
fertility is concerned , and ferti lizer application is concerned.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:16)  
 
So, what is the way forward? So, we need to do m ore research innovation , and promotion , 
and marketing of water soluble fertilizers. Fortified fertilizer , we have already seen some 
fortified  fertilizer  in our last week of lectures; f or example, zincate d fertilizers , boronated  
fertilizers we have seen . Then, also customized fertilizer , then  slow and controlled release 
fertilizers, organic fertilizers;  either they are  liquid fertilizer or concentrated  organic 
fertilizers ; microbial  fertilizer or bacterial inoculants ; then soil amendments or additives and 
nano fertilizers.  
So, these are the need of current agricultural practices and we are going to focus on 
specifically on slow and controlled rele ase fertilizer in this lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:20)  
 
Now , if we see the uptake of macronutrients by the pl ant, it is generally s igmoidal or S-
shaped . So, you can see that when we apply the fertilizer ; so, in the x -axis this time and the y -
axis it is nutrient uptake . So, this green line is showing the nutrient uptake. So, as the time 
progresses, the nutrient up take is continuously increasing. However, the application of 
conventional fertilizer especially when applied on only one occasion here, results in too  large 
amount in the early growth stages , and too little at the later stages of the growth.  
Therefore, the se nutrient use efficiency of the different applied fertilizer is reduced ; because 
we are applying the fertilizer conventionally at one time. However , our fertilizer requirement 
or fertilizer nutrient uptake by the plant generally , generally takes a sigmoi dal form or it i s a 
form . (Refer Slide Time: 12:25)  
 
Now, Lammel claims that is s igmoidal pattern of nutrient  supply can be obtained by applying 
nitrogen fertilizer during plant  growth in several split applications. So, he suggests that if we 
apply the n itrogen at different sp lits; so one split is here, second split is here , and third split is 
here. These individual split will cover a portion of this sigmoidal curve of nutrient uptake. So , 
this split application can take care of these nutrient uptake as f ar as the nitrogen ferti lizer is 
concerned.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:16)  
 
Now, the utilization rate , if we see the utilization rates of different applied mineral fertilizer ; 
we can see in case of nitrogen  50 to 60 percent generally utilized in the first year . In case of  
phosphorus phosphorus 10 to 25 percent, a verage is 15 percent  in the first year. A further 1 to 2 percent per year will be taken up in the following decades. And in case of potassium , 50 to 
60 percent  generally  is taken up in the first year or  utilized in the first year. Now, any  surplus 
plant nutrient in the soil, not taken up by the plants can undergo three t ypes of processes or 
reactions.  
What are those ? Microbi al processes like nitrification, denit rification, or immobilization. 
Chemical pro cesses like exchange , fixation , precipitation and hydrolysis  and physical 
reactions like leaching , physical process like fill leaching,  run-off and volatiliz ation. So, to 
counter  balance these loss of nutrients  which are not being used by the plant, we nee d to use 
the fertilizer based management practices. Now, fertilizer best management practices for the 
application of plant nutrients should always aim to avoid a surplus of plant available nutrients 
in the soil. And this will increase nutrient use efficien cy and minimize unfavora ble effects on 
the environment.  
So, these are the need of the hour. And we should always ; we should always follow these 
fertilizer best management practices to increa se the nutrient use efficiency.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:05)  
 
But, at the same time when you consider the split application of the nutrients, there are 
certain drawbacks of split application. Fir st of all, multiple application  when you  go for 
multiple application that increase the cost of application or the total cost of o peration. It can 
increase the fuel consumption  and also it can increase the traffic and labor . Some times 
surface application also become inefficient due to volatilization and immobilization losses  
and they sometime remain on the soil surfaces.  And finally,  there is a lack of foliar uptake; s o, these are some of the drawback of split 
application. Soil application sometime also make may cause damage to the crop. And when 
we go for the split application that can enhance the risk of missing the proper window  of 
application , if there is a time lag;  so these are the drawback of split application. So therefore, 
there is a demand for a ideal fertilizer. Now , what is an ideal fertilizer ? An  ideal fertilizer 
should have a minimum three following characteristics . First of all, a single application 
should supply enough nutrients throughout the entire growth season to meet the p lant demand 
for optimum growth.  
Secondly, a maximum percentage recovery should be there to achieve the most significant 
return for the cost of the  input. And thirdly , minimum detrimental effects should be there for 
soil at water and atmosphere. So , these are the three major characte ristics of an ideal 
fertilizer.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:02 ) 
  
Now, let us discuss two important concept s; one is slow a nd controlled release fertilizer. So 
what is slow release fertilizer? S low release fertilizer is a class of fertilizers , whose 
fundamental role is to release nutrients to the soil for a more extended period ; so that nutrient 
availability for absorption of plant by plant is substantially prolonged. So , the slow release 
fertilizer generally release the nutrient for an extended period in a reduced rate than in normal 
condition; s o that the  the availability of the se nutrients for pl ant absorption can be enhance d. 
So, these slow release fertilizer release their nutrient content at more gradual rates that permit 
maximum uptake and utilization of the nutrient , while minimizing losses due to leaching , 
volatilization , or excessive growth. So , when there is excessive amount of nitrate , for 
example, that can leach down; s o we can lose some amount of fertilizer element. It can 
release due to volatilization; o r ther e may be loss of nutrie nts by excessive growth, we do no t 
require that. So, we require  slow release fertilize r. Now, what are the differences major 
differences between these convention fertilizers and slow control release fertilizer?  
So, the conventional fertilizers are relatively cheaper tha n slow and controlled release  
fertilizer , because they are more expensiv e. Technology for conven tional fertilizers are 
easier; h owever, for slow release fertilizer , it is more complicated. Use situation for 
conventional fertilizer is popular ; however w e always encourage the slow  control release 
fertilizer . Labor force is highe r, labor requirement is high in case of conventional fertilizer . 
However,  in case of slow release fertilizer (liquire) labor requirement is less . Nutrient 
nutrition supply is worse in case of conventional  fertilizer th is a major point.  
And in case of slow release fertilizer , it is relatively better. As far as the environmental 
pollution or envi ronmental effect is concerned, c onventional fertilizer can cause pollution . However, slow release fertilizer s are  environmental friendly . So, these are the difference s 
between slow release  fertiliz er and conventional fertilizer.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:45)  
 
Now, if we see the subdivision of slow release fertilizer , we can see these are the major 
divisions. Organic nitrogen  low solubility compounds, which are further div ided into 
biolo gically decomposing compounds; f or example urea formaldehyde or UF. And then 
chemically decomp osing compounds like isobutylidene -diurea or IBDU.  And second 
category is fertilizer in which a physical barrier controls the release. For example,  the first 
one is coated with organic polymer. For example, thermoplastics or resin  and coated with 
inorganic materials such as su lfur or mineral based coatings.  
And third is inorg anic low solubility compounds; f or example, metal  ammonium phosphate ; 
for ex ample, magnesium ammonium phosphate , and partially acidulated phosphate rock. So, 
these are the different typ es of slow release fertilizers.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:51)  
 
Now, what is the definition of slow and controlled release fertilizer and stabilized n itrogen 
fertilizer ? Now, there is another term called stabilized nitrogen fertilizer. So, if you see the 
definition of slow and or controlled release fertilizer ; so a fertilizer containing a plant nutrient  
in a form that delays its availability for plant u ptake  or which extends its availability to the 
plants significantly longer than  a reference rapidly available nutrient  fertilizer , such as 
ammonium nitrate or urea, ammonium p hosphate or potassium chloride.  
So, basically the concept is you the fertilizer r elease th e nutrient in a slower rate than  
conventionally rapidly releasing fertilizer , nutrient releasing fertilizer is known are known as 
slow or controlled release fertilizer . Stabilized nitrogen  fertilizer is basically fertilizer to 
which  a nitrogen sta bilizer has been added. So, a nitrogen stabilizer is a substance which is 
added to a fertilizer that extends the time , the nitrogen component of the fertilizer remains in 
the soil , in the either in the form of urea or in t he form of ammonia, ammonical form . So, 
nitrification and urease inhibitors are example  of these nitrogen stabilizers.  
So, basically, you know that you urea is basically hydrolyzed in the presence of urease  
enzyme  and nitrification is process ed where these ammonium ions are converted into nitrate 
ion. Now,  if we inhibit these two processes like nitrification and you  and also we inhibit the 
urease activity that can severely hampered the nitrogen release  from urea as well as 
nitrification process. So, that will s tabilize the nitrogen release;  so, that is why it is called 
stabilized nitrogen  fertilizer.  (Refer Slide Time: 22:54)  
 
Now, what are the characteristics of slow and controlled release fertilizer ? First of all , the 
release pattern . So, the transformation of a chemical substance into p lant available form  is 
very slow; s o, slow release. So, the release rate of a nutrient from the fertilizer must be slower 
than that of  regular chemical fertilizers; this is the f irst crite ria. Second is a fertilizer may be 
described as slow release if the n utrient or nutrients  declared a s slow release , meet these 
following criteria at a temperature of 25 degrees centigrade. So, what are these criteria ? No 
more than 15 percent  released  in 24 hours; or no more than 75 percent  release in 28 days . 
And at least a bout 75 percent  released at the stated release time. So, these are the conditions 
which these slow and control release fertilizer has to meet. And then only we can call them as 
slow  and control led release fertilizer . (Refer Slide Time: 23:53)  
 
Now, here you can see this is a this is a Meister, we are  we can see it is an advanced coated 
fertilizer which are manufactured ; which is manufactured by these JCam Agri  Company 
Limited  of Japan. So, if we can see the nitrogen release in days of these Meister  10 and  
Meister  SS 15 , we can see that we can see the release pattern are for here in the , they are 
forming the linear pattern . And here you can see their sigmoid pattern of nitrogen release. 
And as the temperature increases, the nitrogen release is more steeper  or the nitrogen release 
is higher; y es, we increase the tempe rature.  So, this is an example of coated fertilizer and  the 
nitrogen released from the coated  fertilizer.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:51)  
 Now, what  is the difference between slow release and controll ed release fertilizer?  So, slow 
release fertilizers are control release  fertilizer s. So, slow release fertilizers release the nutrient 
at a slower rate than usual but the rate pattern and duration of the release are not well 
controlled.  However, in case of  controlled release fertilizer , the factors determining the rate 
pattern and duration of nutrient release are well known and controllable. Secondly, the 
nutrient release in case of slow release fertilizer , the nutrient release pattern is fully 
dependent on  soil and climatic condition , and cannot be predicted.  
However , in case of controlled release fertilizer , the release pattern quantity and  time can be 
predicted within certain limits. In case of slow release fertilizer , the biologically decomposed 
nitrogen  products such as urea formaldehyde are commonly referred to in the trade as slow 
release fertilizer . However, in  case of controlled release fertilizer , coated or encapsulated or 
occluded  products are generally generally used . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:58)  
 
Now, if we see how these polymer coated fertilizer works. S o, you can see these NPK 
fertilizers are basically coated with p olymer . And when they come in contact with water , so 
water molecule basically enters here  and they make a chemical reaction and this c hemical in 
in in. As a result of this chemical reaction, there is a volume increase of this particle , and then 
there is chemical reaction. And as a result of this chemical reaction, we can see the release of 
different fertilizer elements like ammonium , nitrate, potassium , H two PO four minus and so 
on. So, this is how the polymer co ated fertilizer generally work.  (Refer Slide Time: 26:45)  
 
Also, you can see the mechanism of microelement released from a coated capsule. So, he re 
you can see that these micro elements which are surrounded by hydrogel and the whole thing 
is surrounded by a coating. Now, the release of these micro elements is basically depends on 
the microbial activity. So, as a result of the change of environmental parameters, there will be 
micro bial attack  and as a result of this microbial activity, these coating degradation  will occur  
and ultimatel y they will release these microelements  for the plant uptake. So, this is how 
these microbes can help in  the in  increasing the availability of the el ements from the coated 
capsule.  
So, this is how we can we , there are different strategies, which we generally use to retard or 
control the release of fertilizer elements ; so, that their availability can be prolonged in the soil 
for the plant uptake.  (Refer  Slide Time: 27:58)  
 
So, the slow and controlled release fertilizer which are available for application . The two 
most important groups of slow and  controlled release fertilizer according to the ir production 
process are mainly , first group is condensation products of urea-aldehyde s which are known 
as slow release fertilizer . And second group is called coat ed or encapsulated fertilizer; t hese 
are controlled release fertilizers. So, now adays , super granules are also there  but they hav e 
only the regional impor tance.  
So, you can see guys how these  slow release fertilizer  or encapsulated fertilizer , polymer 
coated fertilizer can help in slow and controlled release of nutrient , for prolonged pr olonged; 
for prolonged uptake of those nutrient elements by the plant. So, guys we have completed this 
lecture. And, we will will  go from here in our next lecture, and we will  discuss more about 
these fertilizer quality control , and fertilizer adulteration , and the fertilizer testing in our 
upcoming lectures . (Refer Slide Ti me: 29:16)  
 
 
And these are the references which I have used for this lecture. You are welcome to go 
through this literature , and enrich yourself with different aspects , and more comprehensive 
knowledge of fertilizer  and slow release fertilizer and contro lled release fertilizer. Thank you. 
Let us meet in our next lecture.  