Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture  44  
Fertilizer Quality Control, Fertilizer Adulteration and Fertilizer Testing (Cont d.) 
(Refer Slide Time:  0:27) 
 
Welcome friends to this selection number 44 of NPTEL  online certification course of Soil 
Fertility a nd Fertilizers . In this week we are discussing fertilizer  quality control, fertilizer 
adulteration  and fertilizer testing . And in this l ecture, we are going to discuss some of the 
important concepts, how of discussed  focusing on how government of India has promulgated 
several rules for subsidy transferred to our farmers and how they are  doing it through  
advanced management system .  (Refer  Slide Time:  0:57) 
 
So, these are the concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture first of all, direct benefit 
transfer or DBT in fertilizers . Then we are going to discuss the traditional DBT model and 
then fertilizer  sale to farmer to PoS servic e point of sale device . So, we are going to discuss 
how these fertilizers  are being sold using these PoS device. And then we are going to discuss 
some of the key activities for direct benefit transfer implementation. And then we are going 
to discuss some i nitiative for D BT 2 implementation o f this upcoming phase of direct benefit 
transfer implementation.  
(Refer Slide Time:  1:45) 
 
Now, these are the keywords a direct benefit transfer then i FMS  which is a short form of 
Integrated Financial Management System , then PoS device or point of sale device, then subsidy and then release order module or R O module . So,  these are some of the keywords 
which we are going to discuss in this lecture in details .  
(Refer Slide Time:  2:09) 
 
 
So, let us start with the direct benefit transfer in fertilizers . We call it DBT in from in the 
fertilizer  terminologies . So,  why do we need DBT in fertilizer?  So, that is the first question 
comes to our mind , remember that these DBT or direct benefit transfer is the second largest 
subsid y program of government of India . It involves a budget of 83,466 crores of rupees as of 
2019 and why  it is there ? It is there because of accurately targeting the beneficiaries and 
avoiding the delays in the provision of subsidy benefits . So,  unless there i s a direct benefit 
transfer, there may not be accurate target I mean the benefit there may be some confusion 
regarding the beneficiaries.  And of course, there will be delay in provision of subsidy benefits and of course, there will be 
direct and visible i mpact of the benefits to the intended users and finally, the minimizing  and 
the leakage s or diversion . So, these are the major reasons behind these DBT  in fertilizers .  
(Refer Slide Time:  3:39) 
 
Now, implementation of DBT in fertilizers  has been under dis cussion for the last 20 years . 
So, last 20 years we have discussed about these implementations  of DBT and, but in the 
budget speech for 2016 -17, honorable  finance minister of India announced the proposal to 
introduce these direct benefit transfer on pilot basis for fertilizers  in few districts across the 
country with a view to improve the quality -of-service  delivery to the farmers . So, it has been 
initiated in that year. And, the focus of DBT was to or on the pilot basis the focus was to 
improve the quality  of the service delivery to the farmers.  (Refer Slide Time:  4:35) 
 
Now, what is the type of traditional DBT module? So, the key process of traditional DBT 
model as example in case of liquid petroleum gas, which you all know is first of all 
beneficiaries  and their entitlements are defined, clearly defined, who are the beneficiaries and 
what they are entitled to get. And after Aadhaar based authentic ation  subsidi zed entitlements 
are sold to the beneficiaries as market price . So,  basically if you see, we ba sically procured 
the LPG gas for our cooking purpose at the market price and then the subsidy amount is 
transferred to us after sale transaction . So, this is a traditional DBT model which government 
of India follows in case of LPG distribution.  
(Refer Sli de Time:  5:32) 
 Now, complexities , what are the complexities which are involved in th e traditional model ? If 
we want to replicate the same in case of fertilizer . Now , DBT in fertilizer  is much more 
complex than DBT  in other  schemes because first of all th e beneficiary is not defined 
presently anyone is allowed to purchase the fertilizer . So,  in case of LPG the beneficiary is 
defined suppose you cannot get more than one connection of LPG . However, now, the 
beneficiaries are not defined in case of purchase o f fertilizers . So,  and also beneficiary 
entitlement is also not defined . So,  subsidy amount is more than twice the subsidized  price  
this is the more this is a major difficulty in case of DBT in case of fertilizer , so, the subsidy 
amount is more than twice of the subsidized  price .  
So, moving the MRP to market price will cause huge burden on the farmers as he will be 
required to pay the market price upfront. Now, if somebody has to follow the same traditional 
model of DBT for fertilizer,  then a farmer has to  pay the market price upfront and then wait 
for the subsidy to be transferred to his or her account. Now, and also multiple products are 
available with various subsidy amounts like urea , phosphate , potash, fertilizers  and they have 
variety of subsidy amoun ts. Now subsidy component varies plant and company wise even for 
the same product.  
(Refer Slide Time:  7:25) 
 
Now, what is the framework of DBT in fertilizers ? Now, selling price of fertilizer  has not 
moved to market price unlike LPG, so farmers are not r equired to pay the market price 
upfront. Now farmer is generally identified based on Aadhaar  or electrical, the voter ID card 
and also the Kisan  credit card . And farmers decide , a farmer decides what to buy and how 
much to buy ? And fertilizers  are sold to farmers at subsidized  MRP only the subsidy amount is paid by the government on behalf of the farmer directly to the manufacturer . So,  here 
farmer procures the fertilizer  at subsidized  price and the subsidy amount is paid by the 
government directly to the m anufacturer on behalf of the farmers.  
Now , the earlier subsidies paid to the manufacturer based on receipt  in the district , under this 
direct benefit  transfer the subsidy is paid based on actual sales captured on the point -of-sale 
device at the retail poi nt and subsidy to the manufacturer will be paid every week. Instead of  
several months which the earliest subsidy has to , was used to be paid in every  several months. 
Now, it the subsidy to the manufacturer will be paid every week.  
(Refer Slide Time:  9:00) 
 
Now, let us see some subsidy for urea manufactured by Nagarjuna fertilizer  limited . So, we 
can see at the Nangle plant we can see the subsidized  price is same for all the plant  Nang al, 
Panipat , Bhatinda , Vijaipur-I and Vija ipur-II. But the subsidy compo nents varies from 809 
rupees to 984 rupees we can see here and the market price is also varying from different  plant 
products . So, we can see these all -product prices  are in rupees per 45 kg bag . So, you can see 
that subsidy component varies from location to location and market price varies however, the 
subsidized  price is uniform across India.  (Refer Slide Time:  9:53) 
 
Now, how this whole thing a of DBT generally is operated.  So, first of all the demographic 
records are captured using these electronic K YC that means know your customers and then 
Aadhaar  request for verification , Aadhaar  verification is done . So, first these UI DIA database 
which we have demographic records are captured using these e -KYC and then the Aadhaar  
verification is done and then th e information goes to the server Department of fertilizers . 
Now, also, so, if any buyer visits the retailer, the retailer asked for his Aadhaar number of the 
buyer or farmer and if there is no Aadhaar number, then buyers share voter ID or Kisan  credit 
card number . So,  once these retailer logins with biometric Aadhaar authentication, then this 
information will go to server the server will check this Aadhaar authentication and then 
authentication done once the authentication is done  so Aadhaar, then sale tran saction details 
are entered.  
And then we can get it will consult this recommendation from land records and soil health 
card database and ultimately, it will go to the sale completion. Once the sale is completion, 
then we will  get the receipts . So, buyer f irst visit the retailer, the retailer ask for the Aadhaar 
number and then enter  the login the retailer login and then it goes to the request goes to the 
server for authentication and then once authentication of the Aadhaar authentication is done 
through Aadhaar then sale transaction is commenced with the recommendation from land 
records and soil health card scheme and then the sale is completed and the receipt is 
generated . So, this is how the fertilizer  center  farmers so PoS device . So, this is a PoS devic e 
you can see here.  (Refer Slide Time:  12:02 ) 
 
Now, we have seen that the implementation of this integrated financial management system 
or DBT system has streamlined the fertilizer  distribution and  it improved the supply because 
there is n il shortage of  urea owing to neem  coating . So, where it improved the supply the and 
due to the presence of neem  coated urea there is n il shortage of urea because when there is an 
neem  coated urea it is a slow release fertilizer . So, basically our controlled release fertilizer,  
so, there is no further shortage anymore of urea then improving improve cracking through 
iFMS . So,  integrated farmers financial management system you can track it in a better way, 
then overcharging has reduced and both retailers and farmers are sca red to buy the large 
quantities because they are aware of this fact because of this Aadhaar authentication .  
(Refer Slide Time:  13:11 ) 
 So, these are the benefits of using these DBT scheme by the government and there is also 
reduction of illegal cross bor der sales. Due to these DBT and transaction experience has been 
improved and easy for farmers as authentication attempts have decreased and peak season 
sale during the peak season sales to handle the retail outlet at the peak season sale the 
provisions has  been provided for additional five devices. Now, based on Positive assessment 
of pilot implementation, Pan India rollout of DBT was initiated . So, this is how the Positive 
assessment was done and Pan India rollout was of DBT was initiated.  
(Refer Slide Ti me: 13:54 ) 
 
Now, what are the key stakeholders of the D BT you can see department of fertilizers  and then 
fertilizer  Association of India and fertilizer  companies, wholesaler and retailers then National 
Information Centre and other IT partners are there an d state governments . So,  all these are 
there as key stakeholders in the DBT scheme.  (Refer Slide Time:  14:24 ) 
 
Now , for DBT implementation, what are the key activities? Generally for PoS procurement 
and deployment we have seen that there are 2.25 lakh PoS devices were deployed across the 
country . So, it is a huge number. The 9524 trainings were conducted across India it includes 
training of master trainers, wholesalers, retailers, et cetera  and refresher training programmes. 
District and state level DBT coordination committees have been set up by state for close 
monitoring . Then bilingual online training videos prepared for retailers and extensively used 
for training activities . 86 virtual machines or servers deployed to handle the DBT system and 
also the  list of Do's and Don'ts for various stakeholders have been  circulated in this DBT 
scheme.  
(Refer Slide Time:  15:24 ) 
 Now, what are the operational challenges? First of all, the major operational challenge is the 
connectivity issue . So,  how to address th at connectivity? So, first of all, there is a 
recommendation to choose the network service provider carefully with maximum coverage 
then, there has to be a use of an external antenna if connectivity still does not  improve and 
then asking the service provid er to realign the antenna to improve the signal availability at the 
retail shop. And finally, multiple connectivity of Wi -Fi, LAN , PSTN options are provided in 
the PoS. So, these are some of the options to handle the connectivity issue.  
(Refer Slide Time:  16:11 ) 
 
Now, how to avoid the stock related issues ? Stock related issues and other challenge in 
operational challenge in this DBT scheme . So, for this stock  related issue use of this release 
order model for fertilizer  movement or sale on a real time basi s is recommended and advice 
was given to retail as to enter stock carefully in PoS device acknowledgement , acknowledge 
the incoming stock on a real time basis and what stock is entered do not sale fertilizer  without 
PoS. So, these are some of the ways to h andle the stock related issues.  (Refer Slide Time:  16:57 ) 
 
And also, there shall be there should be a grievance redressal mechanism through either 
WhatsApp or DBT PMU  or NIC support team and there is a 15-member  multilingual help 
desk to address these g rievances , what DBT ?  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:17 ) 
 
Now , what are the potential benefits of DBT ? Direct benefits , so it creates Aadhaar  seeded  
database for beneficiaries, it provides transaction visibility at the level of the buyers, it links 
the actual sale s to subsidy payments , linking the soil healthcare data with DBT would lead to 
optimal use of nutrients and subsidy savings . So,  we have already discussed the soil health 
card. So,  if the soil healthcare data is already,  we can enter this in the DBT that c an help in 
optimal use of nutrients and subsidy savings and it can have a significant impact on prevention of leakage and diversion of fertilizer  distribution . So, these are the direct benefits 
of DBT.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:10 ) 
 
What are the indirect ben efits? Now , putting up a PoS devices at 2.25 lakh retailer will create 
a channel that will provide unlimited opportunities for the government to reach rural India 
and this can become a service delivery channel for other ministries also where they can use 
this PoS service for providing other services to the farmers. And then digitizing  transaction 
will create the purchase history of the farmers and which financial institution can use to 
provide credit to farmers based on transaction history at fertilizer  outlet. So,  these are some 
indirect benefits.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:49 ) 
 Now, if we consider if we just compare the previous DBT system and current D BT system. 
Earlier system, we have seen the payments were  made based on the quantity received in 
district an d it used to take 2 to 3 months to make the payment that is for quantity received in 
March, the company became eligible to receive the payment in June. However,  under DBT, 
we can see that the payments are made every week on the quantity sold through PoS and 
DBT bills are generated on the 8th, 16th and 23rd and last day of every month and all bills are 
electronically processed and all approvals are done electronically . So,  these are the benefits 
of using the DBT scheme for rapid payment repayment or rapid di spersal of the subsidy to 
the manufacturers.  
(Refer Slide Time:  19:51 ) 
 
Now subsidy payment model is there so , subsidy claims are submitted online in i FMS  by the 
companies using the eSign  facility and these claims are processed and paid electronically 
every week, integration of iFMS  was done with PFMS . PFMS  is public financial 
management system to enable this complete end to end electronic payment and this is a 
pathbreaking initiative of the Department of fertilizer  and the first such fe at in government o f 
India . So,  this is a very, beneficial scheme for direct dispersal of the subsidy to the 
manufacture without any delay.  (Refer Slide Time:  20:42 ) 
 
Now, also, these PoS software capture all the transaction online, namely retailer registration, 
receipt o r acknowledgement of the stock and sale of fertilizer  to buyers using Aadhaar  based 
biometric authentication. The release order module is the RO module which I have  already 
talked it can track the real time movement of fertilizer  along the plant port -rakepoint-district -
wholesale -retailer chain . So,  it can track the real time movement of the fertilizer  and the 
entire process ensure transparency of all transaction, real time movement or availability of the 
fertilizer,  there will be no manual bookkeeping and s ale of fertilizer  at the actual subsidized  
price with the generation of receipt  at the retail point . So,  you can see DBT has several 
benefits and both for the farmers as well as the manufacturers and there is  a very transparent 
way of dealing with these fertilizer  procurement and dispersal of fertilizer  subsidy to the 
manufacturer.  (Refer Slide Time:  21:55 ) 
 
Now there is a DBT 2 initiative also . So,  in the DBT 2 initiative, there is a plan for 
development of a DBT dashboard and development of PoS 3 softw are and they are thinking 
to develop a desktop version of PoS software.  
(Refer Slide Time:  22:13 ) 
 
And this dashboard for this department of fertilizer , State Agriculture Department , district 
collectors , marketing Federation and cooperative societies are there . There  will be list of top 
20 buyer state wise and district wise and there will be also frequent buyers list state  wise and 
district wise . Stock availability will be there and we can see availability at the port , 
availability at the plant , availabil ity in the states , product wise availability and period wise 
availability in months , season and years.  (Refer Slide Time:  22:43 ) 
 
Now, features of DBT PoS software version 3 and desktop  version we can see provision of 
Aadhaar  virtual ID option during reg istration login and sale activity in DBT software, it can 
capture the sale to farmers , mixture  manufacturers and plante r association  separately with a 
multilingual facility. It has the provision for soil health car d recommendation, which are area 
specific and crop specific recommendations . So, these are the features of DBT PoS software 
version 3 and desktop  version . 
(Refer Slide Time:  23:17 ) 
 
And there will be declination from farmer on the operational landholding and crop area . So,  
there will be further d evelopment of mobile based PoS software and there will be improved 
version of release order module . There will be farmer friendly app to know real time fertilizer  availability and there will be limiting quantity of fertilizer  to large land holders or 
comme rcial firms and direct cash transfer to the farmer . So, these are some of the features of 
the desktop  version of the PoS software .  
(Refer Slide Time:  23:52 ) 
 
So, we have seen that the after the evaluation of the scheme, the preference is for Aadhaar  
based system is increasing among the farmers . So, farmers are now preferring the Aadhaar  
based system. Farmers always prefer the DBT in fertilizer  because it can track the actual 
buyer it can reduce the black marketing and diversion. It can reduce the overchar ging by the 
retailers and it can induce the awareness about quantity and price of the fertilizer.  So, these 
are all transparency related issues and that is why farmers are preferring these DBT 
nowadays .  (Refer Slide Time:  24:37 ) 
 
We have seen that there  are 75.6  percent  of the farmers are aware that urea comes with neem 
extract coating, and 94.9  percent  of the farmers perceive that neem coated urea is beneficial 
for crops and initiatives such as reducing the size of the urea bag and increasing retailer 
margin sales to have a positive impact . So,  these are some of the positive impact and 
feedback for these DBT skills .  
(Refer Slide Time:  25:07 ) 
  
So, guys, we have wrapped up this lecture and we have discussed the importance of DBT 
scheme this is a refere nce which you can consult for more information regarding the D BT 
scheme, we have discussed the advantages of DBT , what are the ways to who is the farmer 
can claim the, farmer can buy the fertilizer  and the manufacturer can claim the subsidy and 
what are th e end to end process , how the government can periodically disburse the subsidy to 
the manufacturer and what are the basic difference between traditional Benefit Transfer and 
the direct benefit transfer here in case of fertilizer  we have discussed in detail s. I hope you 
have now gathered some in some important knowledge of fertilizer  sale and then direct 
benefit transfer.  
Please go through this link for more information regarding the direct benefit transfer. And let 
us wrap up our lecture here. And we will  meet in our next lecture and we will  discuss more 
about the fertilizer  quality control , fertilizer  adulteration and fertilizer  testing in our next 
lecture, thank you very much . 