Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers   
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department   
India  n Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur   
Lecture  46 
Biofertilizers  and Management  of Fertilizers  and Manures  in Soil  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:14)  
 
Welcome  friends  to this 10th week  of lectures  for this online  NPTEL  certification  course  of 
Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers . This is a new week  and in this week  we are going  to talk about  
Biofertilizers  and Management  of Fertilizers  and Manures  in Soil. Not only we are going  to 
learn  about  biofertilizers , but also we are going  to discuss  about  biochar  and also other  
techniques  like fertigation . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  1:06)  
 So, let us first start with bio fertilizer  and in this lecture , lecture  number  46, we are going  to 
focus  on this following  concepts . So, first of all we are going  to focus  on the crop nutrition  
through  biofertilizer  technologies . Then, we are going  to discuss  about  different  types  of 
biofertilizers , then we are going  to discuss  phosphate  mobilizing  and solubilizing  microbes  as 
biofertilizers , then we are going  to see the workflow  for the production  of biofertilizers . 
And finally  we are going  to see isolation  and selection  of phosphate  solubilizing  
microorganisms  from  soil. So, in this lecture, we are going  to have  a comprehensive  idea 
about  biofertilizers  and how we develop  biofertilizers  for commercial  purpose . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  1:52)  
 
Now,  these  are the keywords  for this lecture , first of all biofertilizers , then rhizobium , 
Azotobacter , Azospirillum,  and phosphate  mobilizing  and solubilizing  organisms . (Refer  Slide  Time:  2:06)  
 
Now,  let us start what  is biofertilize r? Let us start with the discussion  or definition  of 
biofertilizer . Now,  remember  that biofertilizers  are living  microbe s, these  are living  
organisms  that enhance  plant nutrition  by mobilizing  or increasing  nutrient  availability  in 
soils. 
So, one of the most  important  feature  of features  of biofertilizers  is, it consists  of living  
organisms  and these  living  organisms  helps  in plant nutrition  by mobilizing  or increasing  
nutrient  availability  in soils. Various  microbial  taxa, including  beneficial  bacteria  and fungi  
are currently  used as biofertilizer  as they successfully  colonize  the rhizosphere , rhizoplane  or 
root interior . And by colonizing  in the rhizosphere  or rhizoplane  or in the root interior  they 
help in the nutrition  of the plant . (Refer  Slide  Time:  3:17)  
 
Now,  one of the most  famous  I would  say biofertilizers  is rhizobium  based  biofertilizers , now 
rhizobium  is a bacteria, so it is a soil habited  bacterium  that can colonize  the legume  roots  
and fixes  the atmospheric  nitrogen  symbiotically . So, basically  these  rhizobium  bacteria  they 
live symbiotically  in the legume  plants  root and they can synthesis  atmospheric  nitrog en. 
They can fix atmospheric  nitrogen  and synthesis  organic  nitrogenous  compounds . 
So, the morphology  and physiology  of rhizobium  will vary from  free living  condition  to the 
bacteroid  of nodules . However , when  fixing  this nitrogen  from  the atmosphere  of course 
rhizobium  creates  a symbiotic  relationship  within  the plant  root. Now,  they are the most  
efficient  biofertilizer  as per the quantity  of nitrogen  fixed , they have  seven  genera  and they 
are highly  specific  to form  nodules  in legumes , referred  to as the cross  inoculation  group . 
Now,  in this picture  you can see these  nodules  in the roots  and these  nodules  are being  
created  by these  rhizobium  bacteria . So, these  are group  of nodules  showing  the red 
coloration  of leg haemoglobin,  which  are present  due to and this leg hemoglobin  is present  in 
this nodules , where  created  by this rhizobium  in the roots  of the legume  plants  and they fix 
nitrogen  from  the atmosphere . (Refer  Slide  Time:  5:30)  
 
Now,  in this picture  things  are a little bit clear , so you can see if there  is a legume  plant  and 
these  are their roots  and these  are the nodules . So, this bacterium  leaves  in these  nodules  and 
they fix the atmospheric  nitrogen  from  air and they convert  these  atmospheric  nitrogen  into 
nitrogenous  compound  for the growth  of the plant , in return  they will get the photosynthesis  
products  from  the plant  for their survival . 
So, you can see in this root nodules  this bacteria  are colonizing  and they are making  a 
symbiotic  relationship  where  they are converting  the atmospheric  nitro gen and giving  this 
synthesized  nitrogenous  product  to plant  and in return  in this symbiotic  relationship  they are 
getting  the photosynthesis  products  for their survival . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  6:34)  
 Now,  if we see the overview  of the benefits  which  we gene rally get from  this legume  rhizobia  
symbiotic  relationship , this will this diagram  will basically  show  that when  there  is a 
symbiotic  relationship  between  rhizobia  and the nodule  and the legume  plants , we can see 
there  is an increase  in fertility  of the soil, because  when  the plant  dies those  nitrogen  which  
have  been  synthesized  which  the nitrogenous  compounds  which  are synthesized  by these  
organisms  will come  into the soil.  
So, that will increase  the fertility  of the system  and also they will increase  the resistance  to 
biotic , and antibiotic  stress  and they can increase  the nutrient  availability  and uptake  and 
overall  they help in the agriculture  sustainability . At the same  time they can decrease  
environmental  pollution , global  warming , they can also impac t reduce  the impact  of climate  
change  and also they can reduce  the loss of organic  matter  and they can help in reducing  the 
use of synthetic  fertilizers , because  these  rhizobium  when  they synthesize  atmospheric  
nitrogen  that simultaneously  reduces  the need  for synthetic  fertilizers .  
And also these  by incorporating  these  legumes  in the crop rotation  can enhance  the organic  
matter  in the soil and of course  that can reduce  the impact  of climate  change  and of course  
global  warming . So, more  fertility  in the soil can enhance  the group  enhance  the growth  of 
the legumes  and that can help in addition  of organic  matter  in the soil.  
So, you can see here, if these  are rhizobium  bacteria  and they are creating  the infection  thread  
within  the root and ultimately  these  nitrogen  will get energy  from  this ATP  in the presence  of 
nitrogenous  enzyme , which  is there  in this bacteria  and ultimately  they will convert  into the 
ammonia  and then hydrogen  molecule . So, ultimately  this rhizobia  when  they create  the 
infection  that initially creates  this infection  thread  and then ultimately  you can see swelling  
bacterioids  and forming  the nodules . 
Now,  mechanism  of rhizobial  infection  and root nodule  formation  it consists  of several  step. 
First of all there  is a root signal  and bacterial  response  and secondly  root hairs  release  a 
substance  that attracts  the rhizobium  and thirdly  the rhizobium  proliferates  and cause  and 
causes  and infection  threat  to form  and infection  thread  grows  into the cortex  of the roots  as 
you can see this infection  thread  goes into the cortex  of the roots  and infection  threads  release  
the bacterial  cell.  
So, you can see the bacterial  cells are ultimately  released  by this infection  thread  that become  
bacteriod  cells in the bacteria  in the root cells and ultimately  that help in formation  of root 
nodule  from  rapidly  dividing  infected  cortical  cells.  So, using  these  infection  thread  these  bacterial , the bacterial  basically  goes to the root cell 
and basically  goes to the cortex  and ultimately  release  into the cortical  cell and then they 
divide  vigorously  and ultimately  creating  those  nodules  and then bacteriods  perform  
symbiotic  nitrogen  fixation . So, this is how rhizobium  bacteria  affects  atmospheric  nitrogen  
by symbiotic  relationship  with the legume . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:06 )  
 
Another  important  bacteria  which  helps  in nitrogen  fixation  is called  the Azotobacter.  Now,  
azotobacter  is a group  of gram -negative  free living  nitrogen  fixing  aerobic  bacteria  inhabiting  
in the inhabi ting in the soil. Then they are generally  oval or spherical  in shape  and form  
thick -walled  cyst, what  are the cysts?  Cysts  are basically  dormant  cells which  are resistant  to 
deleterious  conditions , so the basically  they can leave  for extended  period  of time in harsh  
environment  and under  unfavourabl e environmental  condition . 
Now,  there  are several  species  of course  of azotobacter,  however  azotobacter  chroococcum  is 
the dominant  inhabitant  in arable  soils capable  of fixing  atmospheric  nitrogen , that is 2 to 15 
milligram  nitrogen  fixed  per gram  of carbon source  in a cultural  media . (Refer  Slide  Time:  12:18 )  
 
Now,  what  is the mechanism  of non-symbiotic  fixation  of atmospheric  nitrogen  by 
azotobacter?  So, azotobacter  as I have  told you these  are the free living  nitrogen  fixing  
bacteria  and this free living nitrogen  fixing  bacteria  basically  converts  these  atmospheric  
nitrogen  into ammonia . 
And then they create  this ammonium  ion these  ammonium  ions are taken  up by the plants , 
roots  to convert  into amino  acids  and also this ammonium  ion can convert  into nitrate  by 
nitrifying  bacteria  and these  nitrate  is also again  taken  up by the plant  to convert  into 
ammonium  and other  nitrogenous  compounds . So, this is how these  microorganisms  fix non-
symbiotically  atmospheric  nitrogen . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:08 )  
 Now,  the next question  comes  to our mind  how we can develop  the formulation  in large  scale  
for large  scale  production  of inoculants  from  azotobacter  species ? So, first of all there  are 4 
different  stages  for large  scale  production , first of all isolation  and screening , second  one is 
cultivation , third  one is formulation  and fourth  one is application .  
So, in the first stage  we isolate  the bacteria  from  the soil by plating  in the media  and then 
once  we isolate  these  colonies  of azotobacter,  we identify  them  by molecular  techniques  and 
also we use different  types  of other  technique , like acetylene  reduction  S i and also 
phosphorus  solubilisation.   
So, basically  we first isolate  from  the soil and then we do the molecular  identification  one 
and also once  we do the molecular  identification  then we go to the cultivation  steps , so first 
we inoculate  them  into the medium  and then put them  into the in the BOD  chamber  for their 
multiplication  or we can go for the large  scale  production  in a fermenter . And then the 
formulat ion we can create  this liquid  formulation  or granules  or powder  form  powders  or 
granules  are the solid  formulations .  
Now,  once  we develop  this liquid  or powder  formulation  or the solid  formulation , we can 
either  apply  through  foliate  spray  or through  irrigation  or through  soil amendment  or through  
seed coating . So, these  are different  ways  to which  we can go ahead  and apply  and first 
develop  first and then apply  the azotobacter  by fertilizer  formulations  in the crop, to the crop. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:15 )  
 
Now,  another  important  biofertilizer  is azospirillum.  Now,  azospirillum  is a non-symbiotic  
associative  nitrogen  fixer , aerobic  bacteria  which  can associate  with the growing  root system  of a variety  of crop plants  and increase  their growth  by different  mechanism  called  induced  
systemic  tolerance .  
What is induced  systemic  tolerance ? Induced  systemic  tolerance  may include  production  of 
different  metabolites , plant  hormones , antioxidants , osmotic  adjustments  and defense  
strategies  such as the expression  of pathogenesis -related  genes . So, using  these  strategies  they 
can help in the growth  of the plant . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:57 )  
 
Now,  we have  seen that in a research  the azospirillum  brasilense  can promote  the increase  in 
growth  and yield  of maize  genotypes . So, we can see there  is an increase  of shoot  dry mass  
and also root dry mass with the inoculation  of with the application  of azotobacter  brasilense.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:24 )  
 Also azospirillum  you can see here, here this shows  the maize  plant  from  the seed inoculated  
with azospirillum  brasilense  and you can see higher  plant  developed  and grain  yield , so you 
can see increased  plant  development  and granil , however  in this half you can see maize  plant  
from  the seed without  azospirillum  brasilense  inoculatio n and it shows  the lower  plant  yield . 
So, you can clearly  see the difference  for azospirillum  inoculation  and how these  biofertilizer  
can enhance  the plant  growth  you can see by comparing  these  this maize  crop growths . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:15 )  
 
Now,  cyanobacteria  or blue green  algae  is are the group  of photosynthetic  organisms  which  
can easily  survive  on bare minimum  requirement  of light, carbon  dioxide  and water . They are 
phototrophic  and naturally  occur  and they naturally  occur  in several  agro-ecosyste ms, like 
paddy  fields  and from  Antarctica  to Arctic poles.  
Now,  in the paddy  fields  you can see they can colonize , they can create  a symbiotic  
relationship  with a water  fund called  Azula  and these  is a specific  blue green  algae  or 
cyanobacteria  called  anab ina azuli  they can create  the symbiotic  relationship  with Azula  and 
with those  symbiotic  relationship  they can also fix atmospheric  nitrogen . So, they fulfil  their 
own nitrogen  requirement  by nitrogen  fixation  just like rhizobium  and azotobacter  and 
produc e some  bioactive  compounds  which  promote  the crop growth  or protect  them  from  
pathogens  and improve  the soil nutrient  status . (Refer  Slide  Time:  18:37 )  
 
Now,  this is the azola  which  you can frequently  see in the paddy  field and these  anabina  azuli  
which  is an important  blue green  algae  or cyanobacteria  they can colonize  at the bottom  of 
this azola  and they can fix atmospheric  nitrogen . Now,  cyanobacteria  are also known  as blue 
green  algae , so in agriculture  they can be used as biofertilizers , they can help in soil fertility  
improvement , they can also help in the wasteland  reclamation , then also can help in bio 
control  of pathogens  and crop productivity  enhancement . 
At the same  time from  the environment  point  of view  they can help in bioremediation , carbon  
dioxide  sequestration , because  they are adding  the organic  matter  into the soil and then 
methane  oxidation , augmentation  and biofuels  producing  biofuels  and food supplements  also 
can be generated  from  this blue green  algae .  
So, while  they are helping  in the crop productivity  enhancement  ultimately  they help in they 
can help in agricultural  management , they also can maintain  healthy  agro ecosystem , they can 
ensure  food security  and also they can maintain  the quality  of the food. 
At the same  time from  the environment  point  of view  also they acts as an alternative  energy  
source , they help in the wastewater  treatment  and they can help in the climate  change  
mitigation  and finally  they can help in cleaning  and saving  the environment  from  different  
types  of envir onmental  hazards . So, in overall  these  biofertilizers  can the cyanobacteria  can 
help in sustainable  agriculture  and environmental  development . (Refer  Slide  Time:  20:40 )  
 
 
Now,  let us talk about  phosphate  mobilizing  and solubilizing  microbes  as bioferti lizer. In the 
first let us talk about  the mycorrhizae . Now,  mycorrhizae , basically  comes  from  2 terms , one 
is myco,  another  is rhizae.  The myco  means  fungus  and rhizae,  basically  comes  from  the root. 
So, the meaning  of mycorrhizae  is basically  fungus  root, so it is basically  a mutualistic  
symbiotic  relationship  between  plant  roots  and fungal  mycelia.  Frank  in 1885  gave  the name  
mycorrhizae  to the symbiotic  association  between  the roots , tree roots  and mycorrhizal  fungi . 
It can acts as a critical  linkage  between  plant  roots  and soil. 
So, this association  between  fungus  and the plant  root is characterized  by the movement  of 
plant -produced  carbon  to fungus  and fungal  acquired  nutrients  to plants . Now,  mycorrhizal  fungi  are the key components  of the rhizosphere  and have  essential  roles  in natural  and 
managed  ecosystems . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:00 )  
 
Now,  remember  that mycorrhizal  association  is the most  common  type of association  
between  fungus  and higher  plant  and we can see a symbiotic  relationship  between  fungu s and 
higher  plant . So, in this symbiotic  relationship  mycorrhizae  or the fungus  basically  gets 
carbohydrate  from  the plants  in return  they give the nutrients  which  are required  by the plant  
for their growth . So, both partners  benefit  from  their associatio n. So, this is a symbiotic  
relationship  between  the host plant  and fungus . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:38 )  
 Now,  what  are the different  types  of mycorrhizae ? Mycorrhizal  association  vary in structure  
and function  and there  are 2 major  groups  of mycorrhizae , first of all ectomycorrhizae  and 
endomycorrhizae .  
Now,  let us see ectomycorrhizae,  ectomycorrhizae  are those  mycorrhizal  association  where  
we can see the fungus  is creating  a mantle  or sheath  outside  the plant  root and hyphae  do not 
penetrate  the root cell. So, here you can see the hyphae,  hyphae  do not penetrate  the root cell, 
so these  are ectomycorrhizae . 
On contrary  Endo mycorrhizae,  you can see the root cells of plants , so you can see these  are 
the root cells of the plants  in cross  section , so in case of endomycorrhizae  as the name  
suggests  the hyphae  penetrate  the root cell. So, you can see the hyphae  is directly  penetrating  
the root cell. So, these  are 2 different  types  of mycorrhizal  association . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  23:45 )  
 
Now,  arbuscular  mycorrhizae  is a specialized  endomycorrhizae  which  can help in plant 
nutrition . Now,  these  arbuscular  mycorrhizae  or AM association  occurs  in the majority  of 
agricultural  crops  most  shrubs  and most  tropical  tree species  and some  temperate  tree species . 
Now,  an arbuscu lar mycorrhizae  fungus  belongs  to the phylum  Glomeromycota  and the 
commonly  occurring  genera  of these  AM fungi  are Glomu s, Gigaspora , Scutllospora,  
Acaulospora,  and Entrophospora.  And these  fungi  are obligate  symbionts  and have  not been  
isolated  or nutrien t media .  
So, they have  to be in symbiotic  relationship  to survive  for their survival , so that is why they 
are called  obligate  symbionts.  Also these  AM fungi  are not host specific  although  certain  endophytes  may be from  preferential  association  with certai n host plants . So, you can see that 
if this is a root cortex  with internal  mycelium , so you can see this hyphae  are growing  inside  
and these  are examples  of arbuscular  mycorrhizae . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:13 )  
 
Now,  but the how does AM fungi  helps  in plant  nutrition?  Now,  these  AM fungi  produce  
indole  acetic  acid, cytokinin  and gibberel ins-like substances , this IAA,  cytokinin  and 
gibberellin,  these  are plant  hormones , plant  growth  hormones . So, these  AM fungi  produces  
these  hormones , like substances  which  help plant  growth , then these  fungi  also help the plant  
to uptake  water  and protect  plants  again  infection  by soil bone  plant  pathogenic  
microorganisms . 
And also they interact  synergistically  with beneficial  soil organisms , like nitrogen  fixer , 
phosphate  solubilizers  and other  plant  growth -promoting  rhizo -microorganisms  or rhizo  plant  
growth  promoting  rhizobacteria  or rhizo  microorganisms , we call it PGPRs.  
So, you can see where  the 2 conditions  side by side when  there  is no colonization  of course  
nutrient  transferred  to the plant  root, so whatever  phosphate  is nearby  to the roots  they can be 
uptaken , however  the zinc, phosphate , ammonium , which  are far apart  from  the root cells, 
root zone cannot  be uptake  by the cannot  be uptaken  by the plant .  
However , when  there  are some  mycorrhizal  association , these  mycorrhizal  hyphae  can go to 
these  non-accessible  spaces , because  they are very fine and thin, so they can go to those  non 
accessible  space  and they can access  these  zinc, phosphate  and other  nutrients  from  these un-
accessible  points  and plant  can uptake . So, you can see here they can be these  microorganism  association  can help in uptaking  of 
these  different  types  of nutrients . So, ultimately  they also helps  in increasing  the resistance  to 
foliar  pathogens , they also help in increasing  drought  tolerance , increasing  salt tolerance  and 
also they can also help in the nutrient  transfer . So, this is how these  arbuscular  micorrhizal  
helps  in plant nutrition . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  27:22 )  
 
Now,  if we see the simplified  flowchart  for the production  of the biofertilizer,  of course  it 
starts  with isolation  of microorganisms  from  the soil and then we isolate  it from  the soil and 
then we grow  in pure culture  and once  we develop  them  in the pure culture  then we can 
screen  the microorganisms  for plant  growth  promoting  traits  and then we can pre-create  the 
inoculum  for subsequent  application .  
And then once  we prepare  the inoculum , we add the carriers , carriers  are those  materials  
which  are required  for development  of solid  and liquid formulation  and then we sterilize  that 
and then we adjust  the pH and the texture  and finally  once  this biofertilizer  material  is 
produced  then we apply  in the greenhouse  and we test them  in the greenhouse  and field. So, 
we call it greenhouse  and field validation . So, these  are the 6 major  steps  of the production  of 
biofertilizer . (Refer  Slide  Time:  28:32 )  
 
Now,  if we consider  the maintenance  and mass  production  of arbuscular  mycorrhizae  
biofertilizer  as the fungi  are obligate  symbionts,  and it is difficult  to culture  on nutrient  media  
in the laboratory . So, they are maintained  in the roots  of the living  host plants  as pot culture , 
so it is necessary  to choose  a host plant  species  with a good  root system  to generate  a mass  of 
hyphae  and spore.  And it has been  found  that the rhodes  grass  is the best host, so if rhodes  
grass  is not available  then Guinea  grass  or millet or sorghum  can be used as host plant . 
Now,  production  of this arbuscular  mycorrhizae  inoculum  has evolved  from  the original  use 
of infeste d field soils to the current  practices  of using  pot culture  inoculums  derived  from  
sulphate  disinfected  spores , a surface  disinfected  spores  of a single  arbuscular  micorrhizal  
fungus  on a host plant  grown  in a sterilized  culture  medium . So, this is how these arbuscular  
mycorrhizal  fungal  inoculums  are prepared . (Refer  Slide  Time:  29:49 )  
 
Now,  the carrier  based  inoculums  can be prepared  in the following  way,  first of all with a 
trench  of 1 meter  by 1 meter  by 0.3 meter  and lined  with a black  polythene  sheet, which  
should  be used as a plant  growth  tub and then mix 50 kg of vermiculite  and 5 kg of sterilized  
soil and packed  up to 20 centimeter  of the trench . Then we sprayed  1 kg of this AM inoculum  
from  the mother  culture , 2 to 5 centimeter  below  the surface  of the vermiculites . 
And then maize  seed surface  sterilized  with 5 percent  sodium  hypochlorit e for 2 minutes  is 
sown and then we just apply  2 gram  of urea,  2 gram  of superphosphate  and 1 gram  of muriate  
of potash  for each trench  at the time of sowing  seeds. Further  10 gram  of urea is applied  
twice  for each trench  30 and 40 days after the sowing . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  30:43 )  
 Then quality  test on AM colonization  in root sample  is carried  out on 30th and 45th days and 
stock  plants  have  grown  for 60 days or 8 weeks  and the inoculum  is obtained  by cutting  all 
the roots  of the stock  plants  and the inoculum  produce  consists  of a mixture  of vermicu lite, 
spores , pieces  of hyphae, and infected  root species . 
Thus within  60 days 55 kg of AM inoculum  could  be produced  from 1 square  meter  area and 
this inoculum  will be sufficient  to treat 550 square  meter  nursery  area having  11,000 
seedlings.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  31:22 )  
 
Now,  if we want  to isolate  and select  the phosphate  solubilizing  microorganisms  for soil, we 
have  to use the Pikovskaya  medium . So, this Pikovskaya  medium  containing  tricalcium  
phosphate  as an insoluble  phosphate  source  and it is used for isolation  and enumeration  and 
maintenance  of PSM  or phosphate  solubilizing  microorganism . So, this is the composition  of 
Pikovskaya  media  you can see Glucose , tri-calcium  phosphate , ammonium  sulphate , KCl, 
manganese  sulphate , heptahydrate  and all these  things  yeast extract,  Agar, water  all these  are 
there  in this Pikovskaya  media . (Refer  Slide  Time:  32:02 )  
 
And the procedure  says the rhizosphere  soil samples  are serially  diluted  and 1 ml of 
suspension  from  10 to the power  minus  3 to 10 to the power  minus  4 dilution  is transferred  
into the agar plate  containing  this Pikovskaya  medium . And the plant  and the plates  are 
incubated  for 25 degree  centigrade  for 4 to 5 days. 
And then transparent  root zones  of clearing  around  the colonies , so you can see this clearing  
if you see the clearing  around  the colonies  of the microorganisms  indicate  that phosphates  
have  been  solubilized  by this in this cleared  zone, in this clearing  zones .  
So, these  colonies  can be isolated  in agar slant  by sub-culturing  and the cultures  are tested  for 
releasing  the capacity  of inorganic  phosphate  in liquid  media  containing  insoluble  phosphate  
and the release of inorganic  phosphate  is tested  spectrophotometrically . And the culture  
which  are more  efficient  in releasing  inorganic  phosphate  are selected  for subsequent  use.  
So, you can see here phosphate  solubilizing  bacteria  from  a halo zone  or clearing  zone around  
the growth  in this Pikovskaya  medium  having  tri-calcium  phosphate  as a source  of insoluble  
phosphate . So, basically  they solubilize  this phosphate  which  is present  in tri-calcium  
phosphate  within  the Pikovskaya  medium  and they create  this the halo zones . (Refer  Slide  Time:  33:27 )  
 
So, how to mass  culture  these  phosphate  solubilizing  microorganism , so desired  PSM  
obtained  from  an authentic  source  is grown  in Pikovskaya  medium , Pikovskaya  medium  
broth  in small  flask  of 250 ml and then inoculums  from the small  flask  are transferred  to large  
flasks  of 1 to 2 litre capacity  and placed  in a mechanical  Shaker  for 3 to 5 days under  
optimum  condition  the growth  of the PSM  attains  a population  of 10 to the power  8 to 10 to 
the 9 cell per ml entry  3 to 5 days. 
The culture  obtained  in the flask  is called  starter  culture  and can be used for large  scale  
production . So, a large  quantity  of liquid  medium  is prepared  and placed  in large  flask , 
bottles  and fermenters  and inoculum  from  the starter  culture  at 1 person  by volume  is added  
and the culture  is allowed  to grow  for 3 to 5 days. And the culture  is then mixed  with a carrier  
material  and packed  in polythene  bags and then lignite , charcoal  or vermiculite  are used as 
common  carrier  materials  to finally  develop  this biofertilizers . (Refer  Slide  Time:  34:39 )  
 
 
So, guys  I hope  that you have  gathered  some  knowledge  about  biofertilizers  and know  what  
are the important  biofertilizers  and how we can prepare  them  for mass  production , how we 
can isolate  them , we have  discussed  them  in brief . So, these  are the references  and please  go 
through  these  references  for more  comprehensive  knowledge  on biofertilizer . Thank  you very 
much , let us meet  in our next lecture . Thank  you.  