Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers   
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department   
India  n Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur   
Lecture  47 
Biofertilizers  and Management  of Fertilizers  and Manures  in Soil (Contd.)  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 0:14)  
 
Welcome  friends  to this 47th lecture  of NPTEL  online  certification  course  of Soil Fertility  
and Fertilizers . And in this week , we are discussing  about  Biofertilizers  and Management  of 
Fertilizers  and Manures  in Soil. 
In the first lecture , we have already  discussed  about  the biofertilizers  and what  the definition  
of the biofertilizer , types  of biofertilizer s, we have  discussed  about  symbiotic  relationship  
between  legume  as well as rhizobium  and how rhizobium  can help in enhancing  the 
environmental  and also environmental  safety  and also agriculture  sustainability  we have  
discussed .  
We have  discussed  other  aspects  like phosphate  solubilizing  microorganisms , how to grow  
them  in mass  culture  we have  discussed , we have  also discussed  azotobacter  or free living  
microorganisms , we have  discussed  about  azospirillum,  we have  discussed  about  
cyanobacteria  and how they can help in fixing  the atmospheric  nitrogen  we have  discussed . 
We have  also discussed  the mycorrhizal  relationship , classification  of the myco rrhizae  and 
how to mass  produce  this mycorrhizae  for inoculation  we have  also discussed . 
So, now we have  got some  good  knowledge  about  mycorrhizal  association  and biofertilizers  
and their application , let us discuss  another  very important  concept  as far as the soil fertility  and improvement  of soil physiochemical  properties  are concerned . This is Biochar , so in this 
lecture  we are going  to focus  on Biochar . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  2:00)  
 
Now,  these  are the concepts  which  we are going  to cover  in this lecture . First of all, we are 
going  to discuss  what  is Biochar  and then we are going  to discuss  the methods  of biochar  
preparation , then we are going  to discuss  the application  of biochar  in crop production  and 
then we are going  to also discuss  biochar  and its role in soil fertility  and rate of biochar  
application . So, these  are and apart  from  that we are also going  to see some  case studies  
where  biochar  application  has shown  the beneficial  effect  in plant  growth . So, these  will be 
the topics  for or the concepts  which we are going  to cover  in this lecture . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  2:43)  
 These are the keywords , biochar , soil degradation , pyrolysis , crop residue  and biochar  stove . 
So, these  are some  of the keywords  for this lecture . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  2:53)  
 
Now,  biocha r is an important  component  of soil enhancing  the soil fertility  and crop growth  
and there  are numerous  research  in the application  and development  and application  of 
biochar  for enhancing  the soil fertility  worldwide . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:20)  
 
Now,  the question  comes  what  is biochar ? So, biochar  is a fine grain , carbon  rich, porous  
product  remaining  after plant  biomass  has been  subjected  to thermochemical  conversion  
process , we call it pyrolysis  at temperature  around  350 to 600 degree  centigrade  in an 
environment  with little or no oxygen .  So, basically  in an anaerobic  condition  when  plant  biomass  is converted  into the carbon  rich 
porous  product  that carbon  rich porous  product  is known  as biochar  and the conversion  is 
known  as thermo  chemical  conversion , remember  that these  biochar  is also known  as black  
gold of agriculture  and it varies  based  on quality  depending  on raw material , pyrolysis  
condition , whether  it is enriched  with other  compounds  and how finely  it is ground . So, all 
these  are important  facto rs to determine  the biochar  quality . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  4:36)  
 
Now,  long term intensive  cultivation  of soil results  in soil degradation , we know  that also we 
also know  that long term intensive  cultivation  can decrease  the soil fertility  and at the same  
time they can increase  the soil erosion , which  are the major  concern  in global  agriculture . 
Now,  the decrease  in soil organic  matter  decreases  the aggregate  stability  of the soil, because  
we know  that soil organic  matter  helps  in aggregate  stability . 
Now,  when there  is a loss of soil organic  matter  that subsequently  help that subsequently  
creates  the loss in aggregate  stability  of the soil, therefore  it is crucial  to remediate  the soil 
degradation  by incorporation  of organic  materials , unless  we replenish  the soil by application  
of organic  materials  that ecosystem  function  of the soil cannot  be revived .  
Moreover , biochar  is remember  that this compound  biochar  this compound  this product  
biochar  is rich in nitrate  and phosphate  could  be also proposed  to be a slow release  fertilizer  
to enhance  the soil fertility . So, not only it enhance  the carbon  content  on the soil but also it 
acts as a slow  release  fertilizer  to enhance  the soil fertility . (Refer  Slide  Time:  6:05)  
 
Now,  manures  and compost  that both lead to ammonium  and methane  release  which  can 
aggravate  the global  warming,  because  ammonia  I mean  the methane  is a greenhouse  gas and 
they can aggravate  the global  warming  and groundwater  pollution  and also cause  long term 
contamination  of farmland  due to presence of pathogens , heavy  metals  and pharmaceuticals . 
Now,  biochar  is a renewable  resource , so being  a renewable  resource  biochar  is promising  
resource  for soils fertility  management  due to its economic  and environmental  benefit . So, 
what  are the economic  and environmental  benefits  we are going  to discuss  in our subsequent  
slides . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  6:56)  
  
Now,  let us see the properties  of the biofertilizer . So, the physical,  now we know  that both 
manures  and compost  they lead to the release  of ammonium  and ammonia  and methane  
which  can aggravate  the global  warming  and groundwater  pollution  and also cause  long-term 
contamination  of farmland  due to presence  of pathogens  heavy  metals  and pharmaceuticals . 
Now,  being  a renewable  biochar  is a renewable  resourc es resource . So, being  a renewable  
resource  biochar  is promising  resource  for soils fertility  management  due to its economic  and 
environmental  benefits . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  8:09)  
 
Now,  let us see what  are the physical  properties  of biochar ? So, surface  area as far as the 
surface  area of the biochar,  1 gram  of biochar  can produce  and surface  area of 120 to 460 
square  meter  of surface  area, it is highly  porous  and it helps  in stabilizing  the temperature  and also it can help in increasing  the water  holding  capacity . So, once  we apply  the biofertilizer , 
since  it is porous , it increases  the porosity  and it enhance  the temperature  stability  and it 
basically  reduce  the temperature  and also it can enhance  the water  holding  capacity . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  9:07)  
 
Now,  as far as the chemical  properties  are concerned  pyrolysis  temperature  influences  pH, 
surface  area, porosity  and ash content . Now,  increased  pyrolysis  temperature  increases  the 
content  of carbon , copper , nickel , zinc, and cadmium  and lead and decreases  carbo cation  
action  capacity , electrical  conductivity  and the content  of volatile  matter  and H, O, N, and 
sulphur  of biochar . 
Now,  surface  as far as the surface  chemistry  of biochar  is concerned , now functional  groups  
with the nutrient  retention  capacity  helps in helps  in enhancing  the soil fertility  and also these  
biochar  has volatile  organic  compounds  and produces  aromatic  also they have  biochar  has the 
aromatic  compounds . (Refer  Slide  Time:  10:08 )  
 
Now,  let us see the generation  and surplus  of crop resid ues in different  states  of India, if we 
see how we can create  this biochar  in Indian  condition  of course  we can see that all the steps  
all the different  states  can produce  huge  amount  of surplus  residue . For example , in Uttar 
Pradesh , we can see the surplu s residue  of 13.53  million  ton per year, so and also residue  
born is 0.78 million  tons.  
And you can see in Punjab  residue  generation  is 50.75  million  ton per year and residue  
surplus  is 24.83  million  ton among  these  19.62  million  tons we are burning . And also in 
Maharashtra  also we can see 7.41 million  10 per year is burn and in West Bengal  4.496  
million  tons in burned. So, in India total 92.81  million  tons of residues  are burned  each and 
every  year which  are surplus  and which  could  be converted  into the biochar . (Refer  Slide  Time:  11:22 )  
 
Now,  if you see the contribution  of various  crops  to residue  generation  India of course  cereals  
helps  in generating  the maximum  residue  in India and also the surplus  of the various  crop 
residue  we can see cereals  has a majority  of the surplus  of the residues  which  are produced  in 
India. So, all these  can be utilized  for creation  of biochar . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:47 )  
 
Now,  there  are 3 methods  of biochar , one the heap method  and in the heap method  wood  can 
be converted  into charcoal , you can see here and here we covered  this wood  with leaves  and 
earth  in this heap  method  of biochar  preparation .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  12:12)   
 
The second  method  is known  as the drum  method  you can see the pictures  of drum  method  
preparation  of biochar .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:18 )  
 
And the third  method  is biogas , biochar  stove  method . Now, this is the internal  structure  of 
the biochar  stove  and this is the actual  biochar  stove . So, in this biochar  stove  basically  
biomass  fuel is placed  betwe en the 2 cylinders  so you can see here there  are 2 cylinder , one 
cylinder  and second  cylinder . So, the biomass  material  is placed  between  the 2 cylinders  and 
a fire is ignited  in the center . So, we pack  the biomass  in between  the 2 cylinders  and the fire 
is ignited  in the center . Now, heat from  the center , heat from  the central  fire pyrolyzes  the concentrated  ring of fuel, 
so this fuel are being  pyrolyzed  by the heat which  is generated  by this fire and the gases  
basically  syngas  which  escape  to the center . So, you can see there  are connections , so the 
syngas  can escape  to the center  where  they add to the cooking  flame  as the, as a ring of the 
biomass  turns  into char. 
So, here these  biomass  are pyrolyzed  and basically  they are converted  into biochar  while  the 
gas which  are prepared , which  are produced  during  the pyrolysis  they can help, they can 
escape  into the center  and they can help in the ignition  process . So, this is the biochar  stove  
and this is how biochar  is produced . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:53 )  
 
Now, application  of biochar  remember  that proper  handling  of biochar  is necessary  because  
there  might  be some  erosion  problem  and generally  we apply  this biochar  with mix, after 
mixing  it with the compost  and manure . So, biochar  is generally  applied  to the soil after 
mixing  it with compost  and manure  as you can see they are mixed  with compost  and manure  
and then they apply  to the field. (Refer  Slide  Time:  14:25 )  
 
Now, let us see the detail ed properties  of biochar , let us see the structure  of the biochar,  the 
chemical  composition  of biomass  feedstock  influence  the physical  influence  the physical  
nature . Now, let us see the details  properties  of biochar , if we see the structure  of the biochar  
first of all the chemical  composition  of the biomass  feedstock  influen ces the physical  nature . 
So, basically  what  we are using  as a feedstock  that influence  the quality  of the biochar  and 
operating  parameters  during  pyrolysis  which  are influencing  we generally  influence  the 
physical  structures  they are basically  heating  rate, then highest  treatment  temperature , then 
reaction  residence  time, then reaction  vessel , then pre-treatment , then the flow rate of the 
ancillary  inputs  and finally  the post treatment . So, all these  are important  factors  which  cons, 
which  basically  governs  the physical  structure  of the biochar . (Refer  Slide  Time:  16:02 )  
 
Now, rate of biochar  generally  depends  on type of biomass  used and then degree  of metal  
contamination  and then types  and proportion  of different  nutrients  concentration . So, 
basically  biochar  gives  good  response  in nitrogen  deficit  soil and it also we can have  good  
response  from  legume -based  rotational  cropping  system  and the rates  of application  generally  
varies  from  5 to 20 tons per hectare  or 0.5 to 2 kg per square  meter , this should  be the rate of 
biochar  application . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:47 )  
 
Now, if we see the properties  of different  bio char you can see maize  biochar , cotton  biochar  
and prosopis  biochar , we can see the maize  biochar  has the lowest  bulk density , the particle  
densi ty is highest  in case of prosopis  biochar,  the pore space  or porosity  is basically  highest  in case of prosopis  biochar , pH is towards  a neutral  in case of maize  biochar,  however , they, 
the cotton  biochar  and prosopis  biochar  are having  the alkaline  phH. 
Electrical  conductivity  are low in all three , then cation  action  capacity  is highest  in case of 
prosopis  biochar,  organic  carbon  is highest  in case of prosopis , total nitrogen  is highest  in 
case of cotton  biochar , total phosphorus  is highest  in case of cotto n biochar , total potassium  is 
highest  in case of maize  biochar , total calcium  is highest  in case of prosopis  biochar , total 
magnesium  is highest  in case of prosopis  biochar,  ash content  is highest  in case of prosopis  
biochar  and conversion  is basically  highest in case of prosopis.  
So, basically  depends  on you can see that the properties  are depending  on the type of 
feedstock  which  you are adding  into the, which  we are using  for preparation  of the, 
preparation  of the biochar . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:15 )  
 
Now, what  are the effects  of biochar  on soil health ? Basically  it helps  in as far as the soil 
proper , physical  properties  are concerned  it increases  the soil porosity , it decreases  the soil 
bulk density , it enhance  the soil aggregation  and it enhance  the soil water  holding  capacity , it 
stabilizes  the soil pH, it enhances  the cation  action  capacity  of the soil and it helps  in nutrient  
retention . 
As far as the biological  properties  are concerned , it increase  the microbial  colonization , it 
increase  in, it helps  in the increase  of nitrous  oxide , consuming  (())(18:50 ) nitrous  oxide  is an 
important  greenhouse  gas. So, it helps  in soil biological  properties .  Now, let us see the effects  of biochar  on soil health . So, we can see the soil physical  as far as 
the soil physical properties  are concerned  it increases  the soil porosity , it decreases  soil bulk 
density , at it enhances  the soil aggregation  and it decree,  and also it enhances  the soil water  
holding  capacity , its biochar  stabilizes  soil pH increases  cotton  action  capacity  and enhances  
the nutrient  retention . 
Soil biological  properties , I mean  it increases  the microbial  colonization , increases  the nitrous  
oxide  consuming  bacteria  thereby  reducing  these  greenhouse  gas and also increase  the 
activity  of different  enzyme s and also it helps  in stability  and carbon  retention . So, these  are 
the beneficial  effects  of biochar . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:21 )  
 
Now, we can see effects  of biochar  on different  soil properties  you can see it can enhance  the 
soil organic  matter  because  biochar  has high carbon  content  and it increase  carbon  
concentration . It increase  the water  holding  capacity  because  it has porous  status  and because  
and the mechanism  involved  is increased  macro  porosity  and hydrophilicity . 
It increases  the porosity  becau se it has also porous  structure  so dilution  effects  and formation  
of macro  aggregates . And then it helps  in increasing  the carbon  sequestration  because  it helps  
in long term storage  of stable  carbon  in soil and if the property  is recalcitrant  or stable  carbon 
it decrease  the environmental  methane  emission  because  abundance  of methanot rophic 
proteobacteria  methanogenic  bacteria  also reduce  at too high or low pH. 
So, basically  they helps  in reducing  the environmental  methane  emission , they decrease  the 
nitrou s oxide  emission  by producing  this enhanced  aeration  and stable  carbon , it enhances  the microbial  activity  and immobilization  of nitrogen  and also they decrease  the nutrient  leaching  
because  they have  enhanced , they have  high cation  action  capacity  and they can retain  the 
nutrients . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:47 )  
 
So, if you see the simatic  presentation  showing  the role and potential  of biochar  in the 
agroecosystem . So, you can see there  are several  opportunities , so productivity  benefits  you 
can see it can enhance  the biomass  and also it can enhance  the carbon  sequestration  so it 
enhance  the soil oraganic  matter  and soil aggregate , soil, it stabilizes  the soil reaction , it helps  
in augmenting  the soil nutrient  retention  and availability  and water  retention , microbial  
activities  and heavy  metal  remediation . 
So, all these  are beneficial  effects  for biochar  for as far as the productivity  is concerned  and 
also from  the socioeconomic  point  of view  also we have  the site specificity  and large  scale  
field application  and suitability  for smallholder  farming  and adoption  potential . So, we can 
see that these  can also help in natural  resource  conservation  and biochar  can also helps  in 
biological  productivity , enhancing  the biological  productivity  and those  to help in 
socioe conomic  benefits . 
So, biochar  can not only improve  the productivity  and other  factors  of soil but also 
socioeconomic  involvement , also socioeconomic  potential  of biochar  is also quite  high. So, 
both this socio -economic  potential  and also productivity  poten tial can help in maintaining  the 
biological  productivity , natural  resource  conservation  and as a whole  socio -economic  
benefits . So, finally  it will all boil down  into long-term increasing , the long-term productivity  and also environmental  integrity . So, the agrosystem  sustainability  can be enhanced  by 
application  of biochar . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  23:32 )  
 
Now, let us see the biochar  and biochar  compost  in relation  to crop yield . So, biochar  
improves  the biophysical  and chemical  properties  of the soil as well as nutrient  supply  to 
plants . And biochar  applications  significantly  increases  root biomass , crop growth  and yield  
and biochar  application  at 10 ton per hectare , increases  crop yield  by about  20 percent  and it 
improve  crop yields  by a variety  of mechanisms  including  direct  supply  of nutrients , 
improving  soil pH, increasing  microbial  activity  and nutrient  use efficiency . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:09 )  
 So, if you see some  case studies  we can see that this is an effect  of different  biochars  and its 
application  rates on growth  and yield  attributes  of groundnuts  so we can see when  you are 
applying . So, there  are different  types  of arbuscular  mycorrhizae , composted  coir pith, 
enrich ed farmyard  manure . 
But when  we are applying  the biochar  we are getting  high plant  height and also higher  root 
nodules , high dry matter  and then pod yield,  good  pod yield  and also higher  100 seed weight  
also. And also when  we are applying  red gram  stock  biochar  at 5 ton per hectare  we also can 
get high bio plant  height  and also higher  root nodules , high dry matter , high pod yield  and 
high 100 seed weight . So, that shows  the effect  of different  biochar  on the growth  and yield  
attributes  of groundnut . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:04 )  
 
Also we can see effect  of biochar  application  on yield  and quality of tomato  you can see 
when  we are applying  biochar  2 different  types  of biochar  so bc1 and bc2 are basically  
biochar  at the rate of 5 ton and 10 ton per hectare  so when  we are applying  them  we can see 
enhancing  the fruit yield  and also the other  parame ters.  
So, here we can see the effect  of biochar  application  nutrient  uptake  by tomato  we can see 
when  we are applying  different  types  of biochar , biochar  1 and biochar  2, we can see uptake  
of nutrients  implant  we can see up is quite  enhancing  from  this c is basically  control  as 
compared  to control  you can see the nitrogen  uptaken  in the plant  is increase  and also when  
we are applying  more  amount  of biochar  the more  amount  of nitrogen  is being  uptaken  by the 
plant . And similarly  for potash  also you can see there  has been  a significant  increase  in potash  take 
when  we apply  the biochar . However , we have  not seen any significant  increase  in phosphate  
uptake  by the application  of biochar  in tomato . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  26:15 )  
 
So, summarily  guys  we have  seen that biochar  called  black  gold in agriculture  is highly  stable  
carbonized  product  of biomass  and we produce  this biochar  by different  methods  by 
anaerobically  burning  the crop residues  through  pyrolysis  process  and ultimately  it will 
convert  into this carbona ceous  compound .  
So, these  biochar  improve  agriculturally . So, summarily  what  we have  seen? So, summarily  
we can see that biochar  which  is also known  as black  gold of agriculture  is a highly  stabilized  
carbonized  product  of biomass  and we generally  produce  this biochar  by different  methods  
by through  the process  of pyrolysis  where  this plant  biomass  is converted  into biochar , it 
improves  the agriculturally  significant  plant  soil parameters , such as soil pH, catenation  
capacity  and soil water  holding  capacit y. 
And it reduce  the greenhouse  emission  and sustain , sorry , so summarily  we can see that 
biochar  which  is also known  as black  gold of agriculture  is a highly  stable  carbonized  product  
of biomass . It improves  agriculturally  significant  soil parameters  such as soil pH, catenation  
capacity  and soil water  holding  capacity . It reduces  the greenhouse  gas emissions  and 
improves  carbon  sequestration . And it is used as soil amendments  and as a nutrient  source . (Refer  Slide  Time:  28:44 )  
 
So, I hope  guys  you have  got some  basic  idea about  biochar . And there  are different  
references  for biochar , you can find different  research  papers  focusing  on biochar  
applications  and they are on harnessing  their benefits  from  soil. So, you guys  can go ahead  
and see those  papers  and research  articles  to enrich  yourself  about  biochar  properties . Let us 
wrap  up this lecture  here and let us meet  in our next lecture  to discuss  other  management  
aspects  of fertilizers  and manures . Thank  you. 