Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture – 48 
Biofertilizers and Management of Fertilizers and Manures in Soil (Contd.)  
Welco me friends to this lecture of NP TEL online certification course of soil fertility and 
fertilizers. And we ar e going to start lecture number -48 in week 10 . And in this w eek we are 
discussing about bio fertilizers and management of fertilizers  and manure.  Now, in this l ecture, 
we are going to focus on another important management technology that is called mulching. In 
our previous 2 lectures of this week, we h ave already discussed about bio fertilizers , which are 
very important nowadays as far as t he soil fertility is con cerned.  
Also, we have discussed about biochar, which is an important amendment for soil , or important 
input for the soil for  augmenting the soil fertility.  We h ave discussed those in details. In this 
lecture, we are going to focus on mulch a nd different ty pes of mulching.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:15)  
 
So, these are the concepts which we are going to focus in this lecture. First of all , how mulch 
works , and then which materials can be used as mulches ; and then effect of mulching on soil 
physical properties, th en effect of mulching on soil chemical properties , and the n effect of 
mulching on soil biological properties. So, these are the broad topics which we are going to 
cover in this lecture. Now, remember that mulching is a very important practice or management  concept, which we generally use for several beneficial purposes , like to conserve the moisture , to 
conserve the soil , to reduce the soil erosion.  
So, there are several benefits benefits of mulching ; and there are several methods for doing the 
mulching , and we ar e going to discuss all of them.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:10)  
 
Now, these are the concepts keywords which we are going to focus in this , or we are going to 
discuss in this lecture mulching , organic mulches, in organic mulches, then mixed mulching , and 
flat mulching. So, these are the some of the keywords which we are go ing to discuss in this 
lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 02:27)  
 
 
Now, you can see in this picture ; these are different types of mulch. We can use either crop based 
mulching that means crop r esidue based mulching , where we are using the straw here in this 
picture. And also you can see , we can also use the plastic mulch for th e mulching purpose. Now, 
let us see how this mulching works.  So, the question which we are going to answer in this lectu re 
is the effect of mulching on soil properties. Then , we can understand how this mulch  works.  (Refer Slide Time: 03:09)  
 
Now, let us first define what is mulch ? A mulch is any material , other than soil , placed on placed 
or left at the soil surface for s oil and water management. So, in this picture you can see different 
types o f mulching practices. So, mulche s are the materials placed over the soil surface to 
maintain moisture and improve soil condition. So, a mulch  can be any material,  which we 
generally  place or left at the soil surface to cover the soil for soil and water management . And 
basically , they are used for maintaining the soil moisture as well as  to improve the soil condition.  
Now, the next question comes what is mulching . So, in agri cultural gardening or practices, 
mulching is the practice of leaving crop residues or other materials on the soil surface for soil 
and water conservation , and keeping favorable and stable environments for plant growth . Not 
only by covering the bare soil surface usi ng different types of crop residues as well as plastic or 
any other material , we can ensure that we can conserve the soil and water. We can also ensure 
the favorable environments for the plant growth by mulching . So, these are some of the 
importance of mul ching and mulching is a practice . (Refer Slide Time: 04:46)  
 
Now, so the global temperature we know that the global temperature has been increasing over 
the years due to climate change, which is a kind of a buzzword now adays.  Now, climate change 
directly  or indirectly affects water and energy consumption in the agriculture sector. Now, the 
application of mulching basically reduces soil evaporation . Of course, when we are covering the 
soil surface using these crop residues or plastic sheet, we  can reduce t he soil evaporation;  
because if there is a bare surface that will encourage the evaporation of water from the soil , we 
can conserve . 
In other words, we can conserve soil moisture, we can suppress the growth of the wheat weeds ; 
and we can control the soil s tructure and temperature . How we can control the soil  structure?  
Because , if we are using the mulching, then we can keep the soil out of the influence of abatin g 
action of the rain rainfall; a nd in that way we can conserve the soil structure . And also usin g the 
mulching not only we can conserve the soil moisture;  we can also regulate the temperature or 
control the soil temperature for better  crop growth. Now , of course , when we are covering the 
soil using mulching material that is controlling the soil erosi on; and it improves the soil aeration , 
and it influence s the soil micro -organisms also.  
Now , mulch tilling  is also a form of minimum tillage , where the minimum tillage is done ; and 
basically the rest of the rest of the bare soil surface is covered using th e mulching materials. 
Now , it is a cost efficient alternative for high yield conse rvation agricultural practices.  (Refer Slide Time: 06:53)  
 
So, let us see  in a pictorially how this mulch works. So , here you can see there are 2 conditions 
side by side. In  right side , you can see there is soil surface bare s oil surface without any mulch; 
and here you can see the soil surface with mulch bed. Now, when there is a direct sunlight, 
which is interacting with the soil surface, you can see that that can build up t he weed  heat; or that 
can build up the temperature . And as a result of that, the plants will wilt from moisture stress ; 
and because moisture will be lost due to evaporation ; and or whatever rains are sprinkler , 
splatters and erode on mulched  soil. 
So, basically when there is a rainfall, the rainfall will basically deep touch the soil surface , and 
will cause the soil erosion. So, these are the harmful effects of a bare soil surface. Now , on 
contrary we can see when we are putting this mulch, mulch bed, we ar e keeping the sunlight 
from reaching the soil;  thus minimizing the evaporation , and also t hat can conserve soil moisture. 
And also weed seeds germinate when exposed to light , but stay dormant under  the mulch. So , 
when there is a mulching that will make the  seeds of the weed dormant and they will not 
germinate . And as an organic , as organic mulch breaks down, i t releases nutrients that plant  use. 
So, since these are some of the some of these mulching materials are organic, they will break 
down ; and it will r elease some of  the nutrients that plants use. So, you can see that can also cover 
the soil from the baiting action of the rainfall ; and as a result , there will be less , there will  be less 
erosion from the soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 09:05)  
 
Now, so this is h ow mulching works. Now , next question comes to our mind what are different 
types of mulching materials. So , we can use either organic materials , or we can use inorganic 
materials , or we can use special type of metrics like gravel, concrete, tephra  mulch et cetera  as 
mulching material s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:33)  
 
Now, of course organic materials are  crop residues ; and the inorganic materials are plastic sheet. 
So, let us talk about the organic mulches. You can see some of the good pictures of organic 
mulch.  So, it is a type of mulching in which the mulching material is always organic , and organic residues , then grass clips,  then leaves , hay,  straw ; and then shredded bark , whole bark , husk, then 
paper , then animal waste , cover crop  et cetera  are generally use d as mulching material . Organic  
remember , organic mulches are temporary and decay over time . Since they are organic, they can 
decay over time;  because at the same time, when they are decaying or decomposing, they are 
adding organic matter into the soil , and they increas e the water retention capacity.  
Because , the addition of organic matter in the soil can improve the water retention ; because soil 
organic matter has high water holding capacity. And during the decomposition also, they can 
provide the nutrient s, they can release the nutrients for the plant growth . So, these are the these 
are different types of organic mulches , and these are the benefit s of using the organic mulches.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:53)  
 
Now, next is inorganic mulches. Now , in this form m ulchi ng material is always formed in organic 
sources or synthetic materials. The materials used in this type is usually polymer fil m, plastic 
bags, and nylon sheet . As you can see in this picture, the the bare surface is basically covered by 
these plastic s heets or polymers polymer film. N ow, what is mixed mulching ? So, mixed  
mulching is the mixed application of organic and inorganic materials as mulching treatments . 
And these are also practiced under various crop condition in different climatic zones.  
So, n ot only we are going for exclusive organic mulches or exclusive inorganic mulches, we can 
mix them together as a mixed mulching ; and we can also use them for conserving the soil moisture as well as the s oil, also the soil materials from the action of sunli ght as well as from the 
rainfall.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:02)  
 
Now, what are the methods of mulching? The one of the method is called flat mulching. So , flat 
mulching is the traditional method of mulch  application , in which soil surface is covered by 
organi c, inorgani c or mixed mulching materials; t his called flat mulching. Second one is plastic 
mulching with holes. So, it is a modified flat mulching in which soil  surface is  only partially 
covered . Now, this mulching increases the rainfall and soil aeration compared to the traditional  
flat mulching . So when there is a plastic mulching with hole this can increase the water 
infiltration and also soil aeration , because some areas are still bear or uncovered.  
Third one is ridge shape mulching . So, in this mulchin g the ridge is covered by plastic film that 
channels rainwater into furrows and minimizes surface runoff. And ridge -furrow  mulching, 
which is a full mulching on both ridges , and furrows by plastic film or together organic  mulches 
with plastic layers. I wi ll show you the difference between ridge  mulching and ridge -furrow  
mulching and so , and the other mulching types.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:25)  
 
Now, if we see here, these a re different mulching methods; s o we can see this is a flat mulching. 
So, in the flat mulching you can see the fully covered flat mulching ; and also you can see 
partially covered flat mulching . In case of ridge -furrow  mulching, we can see ridge  covered 
mulching as well as ridge -furrow  covered mulching , both of them. Now, these are 2 types o f 
ridge  covered , like ridge  planted ; so we are planting in the ridge  and we are covering that. And in 
the furrow mulching furrow planted , we are planting in the furrow ; and we are covering the 
ridge.  
So, in these  2 cases , one is in both the cases , we are c overing the ridge;  however , in one case we 
are planting in the ridge ; in another case , we are planting in the bare furrow. Another method is 
called ridge -furrow  covered , where we can grow crops in both region furrow,  and both of them 
are covered . And also where both of them are covered like the the cr ops are planted in the 
furrow; a nd both ridge  and furrow  are planted. So , these are different types of mulching methods 
under the broad category of ridge -furrow mulching.  (Refer Slide Time: 14:44)  
 
Now, let u s see the effect of mulching at different depths on soil porosity. We can see here there 
are C K stands for , these this is basically a case study , where the CK stands for the bare soil ; and 
then C B stands for the cobblestone base d mulching ; and then WPB sta nds for the water 
permeable bricks , and then PB stands for the pine barks  mulching , and green waste compost is 
GWC, and turf  grass is  TG. So, in thes e different types of coverage, w e can see at different 
depths . How this total porosity is increasin g and bu lk density is  changin g with different types of 
cover?  
So, we can see at 0 to 10 centimeter , we are getting the highest highest porosity in case of the 
green waste compost . And also we are getting the highest macro porosity with the turf grass ; and 
also we are getting the micro porosity highest micro porosity with the green waste compost . So, 
we can see at different depths,  how these properties are changing based on different types of 
coverage.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:11)  
 
Now, also  we can see in this case s tudy the relationship between soil bulk density, total porosity 
and mulch rate. So, we can see as we inc rease the mulching rate in mega  gram  per hectare, we 
can see tota l porosity is also increasing; a t the same time bulk density is decreasing. So, of 
course, when there is an increase in total porosity,  we a re getting lower bulk density; s o, both of 
them are beneficial for the crop growth. So, mulching actually improves the soil physical 
condition by increasing the total porosity and also by decreasing the bulk density . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:59)  
 If we want to see the impact of mulching on soil temperature, y ou can see the daily fluctuation of 
soil temperature at 515 and 25 centimeter of soil depth under different mulching materials. So, 
this is air tempera ture, so you can see these is the variation of te mperature  soil temperature , as 
the changes of the soil as the changes of month and day . And you can see here monthly changes 
of soil temperature , this black solid line ; and you can see these  are different ty pes of mulches . 
So, one thing is  for sure  that when we are using the mulching material that is basically reducing 
the soil temperature which will be benefici al for the growth of the plant.  
So, we can see here the temporal variation of  soil temperature and to control the soil temperature, 
we can use differe nt types of mulching materials.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:04)  
 
Now, if we want to see the soil moisture variation under different mulching materials , we can see 
here when there is rainfall . So, in the x -axis basically these are temporal scale , and in  the y -axis 
we can see soil moisture content . We can see that as compared to the bare soil when we are using 
the mulching materials , they are conserving more moisture. So, the soil moisture  content is 
increasing wi th the use of different mulching materials. So, these are some of the positive impact 
of mulching for conserving or for soil moisture.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:54)  
 
Now, also we can see the soil moisture variation under different mulch rates. So, as the mul ching 
rates increases , we can see field capacity moisture  is also increasing. And also we can also see 
with the increasing mulching rate , we can see increase in available moisture capacity. So, these 
are some of the beneficial effects of soil moisture  bene ficial effects on field capacity as well 
available moisture capacity with the mulching rate wit h the increasing mulching rate.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:27)  
 
Now, what are the impact on crusting and sealing? How does mulching can impact the crusting 
and seali ng? Now, plant residues on the soil surface can protect the soil against crusting and sealing ; we know what is soil crusting and soil sealing. Because when there is an increase of soil 
organic matter that can decrease the soil surface sealing,  and gravel m ulch helps to avoid soil 
sealing and crusting. And sometimes plastic mulch increases the risk of crust formation also . 
Because , when there is a cover over the soil surface that will basically protect the soil from the 
impact of the rainfall ; and as a resul t there will be less detachment of soil particles . 
As there will be less detachment of the soil particles , there will be less clogging, less sealing and 
less crust formation. Soil aeration is another important issue which we can address by using 
mulching. Now , crop residue mulch improved soil erosion by promoting free exchange of gases 
between the soil and atmosphere. And secondly oxygen diffusio n rate is higher under mulch tha n 
under un mulch ed condition . And very high levels of carbon dioxide build up take s place under 
the plastic , as the film  does not allow you to escape. So , when there is a plastic mulch, there is a 
chance of high levels of carbon dioxide buildup ; because that cannot escape it , that cannot escape 
the mulching cover . 
And also oxygen diffus ion rate is higher under mulch tha n under unmulched condition.  So, these 
are some of the impacts on crusting and sealing , and soil aeration by mulching materials.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:25)  
 
Now , if we want to see the response of soil pH for mulch treatmen t at different soil depths, we 
can see at different soil depths 0 to 30 centimeter , 30 to 60 centimeter , and 60 to 90 centimeter ; 
without mulch plus 100 percent  of irrigation , and mulch plus 100 percent of irrigation, end season and beginning season. We ca n see that the soil pH basically are less impacted. So , 
without mulch you can see as we go down, the soil pH is quite high. However , when we are 
using the mulch, we are stabilizing the soil pH towards the , towards the neutral range ; and that is 
helpful for  up tak ing the nutrients.  
Similarly , we can see here in this beginning season treatments also , as we are going down that is 
increasing the soil pH . However, by using the mulch at least for 0 to 30 and 30 to 60 centimeter , 
we are able to we are able to cont rol the soil pH. So , these are also the benefits of using mulching 
for conserving, or to o r acts as a buffering for soil pH.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:48)  
 
Also if we want to see the response of soil electrical conductivity by using different mulching 
materia l, you can see here without mulch plus 100 percent i rrigation you can see . In the control 
plot, you can see that those plots are having higher s alinity. H owever, when you are using the 
mulching at least up to 60 centimeter , we can see they are showing redu ced salinity stress. At the 
same time we can see here , in the beginning season also similar trend  can be observed at least in 
the 0 to 30 centimeter depth.  
So, these are some of the important benefits of using the mulching material  for controlling not 
only the soil erosion , but also for controlling the soil electrical c onductivity as well as soil pH.  (Refer Slide Time: 23:46)  
 
Now, if you also want to see the response of total nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium in soil for 
mulch at different so il depths, you can see when you a re using mulching , the total nitrogen, total 
phosphorus and total potassium response are also increasing. So, not only a different 
improvement of different physical condition, but also for improving different types of chemical 
conditi on also , this mulching is very much important. And this mulching thus is recommended 
by the scientist for better crop growth . Because , it can not only produce the favorable soil 
physical condition but also favorabl e soil chemical condition also.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 24:41)  
 Now, i f you wa nt to see the microbial biomass  carbon , and microbial biomass nitrogen , and 
dehydrogenase  activity, and urease activity in different mulching treatment;  we can see this is 
NMC stands for no mulching with inorganic nitrogen N  fertilize.  GMC stands for gravel 
mulching with inorganic nitrogen fertilizer. FMC stands for plastic film mulching with the  
inorganic nitrogen fertilizer ; and FMO stands for the plastic -film mulching with chemical 
nitrogen fertilizer. So , we can see here with FMO , we can see higher microbial biomass carbon ; 
and similarly, we can also see the higher dehydrogenase activity with FMO.  
So, tha t shows as compa red to the NMC. S o, that shows not only the physical properties not only 
the chemical properties, but al so the biological properties can also be improved b y using the 
mulching practices.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:42)  
 
So, the n ext question comes to our mind; so,  mulching has all these positive effects. Does 
mulching has any negative impact? Yes, although mulchi ng has many advantages, it has some 
negative effects also. So , the major negative consequence of the use of plastic mulch is related to 
handling the plastic with waste s. So, the plastic because plastic is you know non -degradable, 
biodegradable, so that can  create environmental problems. So , the plastic film reduce residue 
reduces soil porosity ; and hence air circulation changes  and also reduces the air circulation . 
It changes the microbial communities and leads to l ow soil fertility sometimes. T he plastic film 
mulching significantly reduces soil organic matter , and greatly increases greenhouse gas emission . As I ha ve already told , there will be a buildup of carbon dioxide ; and they can promote 
the soil degradation . And can cause soil water repellency and occ ur as potential pollutants in the 
soil. So , these are some of the negative impact of plastic mulching . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:00)  
 
Organic  mulching materials such as wood chips and bark may occur as also soil acidifier s. So, 
when we apply them that can als o enhance soil acidity which is not favorable for plant growth. 
Too much organic mulch can also lead s to excess moisture , and excess moisture  creating new 
problems such as pests , anaerobic condition, and rotting of t he roots that can damage the plants . 
And when carbon  rich materials as straw or stal ks are used for mulching , nitrogen from the soil 
may be used by microorganisms for decomposing those materials. And as a result, the nitrogen 
may be may be temporarily unava ilable for plant growth.  So, these are some of the negative 
impact of plastic mulching and organic mulching . (Refer Slide Time: 27:52)  
 
Now , mulch farming is a form of conservation tillage that preserves soil quality and the 
environment. So , summarily we can found we can understand th at this mulching is important; i t 
has some negative impact . But, at the same time , it is a form of conservation tillage that 
preserves soil quality and the environment ; and mulch affects soil physical properties by 
improving soil o rganic matter c ontent and increas ing soil porosity. The mulching  materials , by 
modifying the microclimate and reducing soil evaporation , exert  significant impact on t he water 
saving in agriculture.  
However, every type of mulch has some strength and weaknesses, making it suitable for some 
situation and  not for others. So, these are some of th e important aspects of mulching.  (Refer Slide Time: 28:51)  
 
Availability , durability and cost of mulching materials are the important issues to be taken into 
consideration for the selection of mulchin g materials. And the main focus should be to reduce the 
negative impact of mulching which we have just discussed. And to get the  maximum benefit 
from mulching, i t is imperative to investigate the effects of different mulching materials under 
various field condition s for the best fit of the mat erials to the crop and climate.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:24)  
 
So, guys, by this week, by this let us wrap up this mulching discussion . And these are the 
references which you can you can see for gathering more information  regarding mulching . And so, let us wrap up this lecture here ; and let us meet in our next lecture to discuss some other 
important concepts. Thank you very much . 