Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture  42 
Fertilizer Quality Control, Fertilizer Adulteration and Fertilizer Testing (Contd.)  
Welcome friends to this new lecture of NP TEL online certification course, soil fertility  and 
fertilizers. We are at week 9, and in this week we are discussing fertilizer qu ality control, 
fertilizer adul teration and fertilizer testing. In our previous lecture, w e have discussed about 
the slow release fertilizer  and what are the characteristics of the slow release fertilizer ? Why 
we require slow release fertilizer ? And in this lecture we are going t o cover the following 
concepts.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:56)  
 
So, the f irst concept we are going to cover in this lecture is objective of customized  
fertilizers, then characteristics or quality of customized  fertilizers, then method of customized  
fertilizer manufacturing , then advantages of customized fertilizers , and finally , we are going 
to discuss some of the customized formulations available in India . (Refer Slide Time: 01:22)  
 
Now, these are some of the keywords like fertilizer use efficiency, customized fertilizer, 
customized formulation, bulk blending, and steam granu lation. So, these are we these are 
some of the keywords which we are going to discuss in this lectur e. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:52)  
 
Now, if we consider the fertilizer use efficiency, you know the definition of the fertilizer use 
efficiency . Fertilizer use e fficiency is  the basically the amount of nutrients up taken by the 
plant , divided by the difference between the nutrient applied through fertilizer , minus the 
native nutrient concentration in the soil. So, if we consider the fertilizer use efficiency, thes e 
are different nutrients and the (fat)  and they are and their fertilizer use efficiency you can see 
for nitrogen, the fertilizer use efficiency goes from 40 to 50. So metimes it is lower than that; sometime we can see that peop le are saying that there are 35 percent  accuracy,  fertilizer use 
efficiency for nitrogen . 
From phosphor phosphorus, w e can see the efficiency varying from 15 to 20 percent ; for 
potassium , we can s ee the efficiency from 50 to 70 percent . For sulph ur, we can see the 
efficiency varying f rom 8 to 12 percent. And for micronutrients, w e can see the efficiency i s 
very less that is less than 5 percent . So, these are some of the fertilizer use efficiency for 
different nutr ients.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:22)  
 
Now, in the intensive system, there ar e possibilities to build up negative balance and 
deficiency of secondary nutrients and micronutrients. So, when there is an intensive 
agriculture for example, the current agricultural scenario , we can see there is a possibility is 
to build up the negative balance and deficiency of secondary nutrients or micronutrients . And 
balance fertilization , site specific nutrient management  and customized  fertilizer , in this 
condition will play a very important role to attain high future targets. Now , the development 
of site and crop specific ready made customized fertilizers.   
We are going to discuss these , these a re site and crop specific ready made for customized 
fertilizer.  These are based on scientific principles may prove to be more effective to meet the 
plant requi rement , and to enhance the nutrient use efficiency. This lecture will be focusing o n 
this customized fertilizers. Now, t his approach is likely to boost crop yield and arrest  declined 
soil fertility in a long run in a eco -friendly manner . (Refer Slide Time : 04:43)  
 
Now, if we see the concept of customized fertilizer, the major goal of customized  fertilizer is 
to increase the fertilizer us e efficiency. Now, how to deter mine the customized  fertilize r 
depends on several factors. First of all, we have to take care of the weather parameters, then 
the variety , and then we have to feed it into the crop model which will analyze the potential 
yield and current yield , and finalize the target yield . And then it will give the through the 
decision support system , we can  have the fertilizer recommendation. Now , this fertilizer 
recommendation acts as a major major foundation for developin g these customized fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:46)  
 
Now, what is the definition of a customized  fertilizer? Customized  fertilizer s are multi -
nutrient carriers , designed to contain macro and micro nutrient forms , manufactured through a systematic process , satisfying the crops nutritional needs , specific to its sit e, soil and stage , 
validated by a scientific crop model developed by an  accredited fertilizer manufacturing 
company. And this definition of customized  fertilizer is given in fertilizer control order of 
1985 . So again, we can see from this definition , it is a multi -nutrient carrier. It is it has both 
macro and micro  nutrients manufactured through a  systematic process, which can satisfy the 
crop need . 
And it is  very much specific to soil stag e of the crop and site  and it has been validated by 
scientific crop model which has been developed by . And this customized  fertilizer is 
developed by accredited  fertilizer manu facturing or marketing company.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:10)  
 
Now, if we see the objectives of customize d fertilizer , we can see the major objective of 
customized  fertilizer is to provide sit e specific nutrient management  for achieving maximum 
fertiliz er use efficiency for the applied nutrient  in a cost effective manner; s o, it is very much 
site specific . And the customized  fertilizer generally include  the the combination of nutrients 
on the basis of site , soil testing , crop need , and stag e of crop.  (Refer Slide Time: 07:46)  
 
So, if we can see the best management practices based on nutrient stewardship as far as the 
customized fertilizer are concerned, customized fertilizers are concerned ; we can see that 
customized ferti lizer best management practices depends on four major factors. What are the 
factors ? Productivity, then profitability, then favo urable biophysical and social environment , 
and c ropping system sustainability; s o, these four are the major foundations of custo mized  
fertilizer management.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:24)  
 
Now , if we see the characteristics or quality of customized  fertilizer, these are some of the 
features as per the fertilizer control order of 1985. First of all, it has to be granular in size. 
And it  has to be granular and minimum 90 percent  should be between 1 to 4 millimeter  and below 1 millim eter should not exceed 5 percent  of it. And it should have 100 percent  water 
soluble grade ; so, the customized fertilizer should be 100 percent  water soluble . And 
minimum nutrient content in specific grade  should contain more t han 30 units of all nutrients; 
so these are some of the important characteris tics of customized fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:17)  
 
Now, the next question comes to our mind , why we ne ed customized fertilizer ? Because we 
can see nowadays as a result of intensive agriculture , we can see imbalanced use of fertilizers  
and then we can see continuous increase of secondary and micronutrient deficiency. We can 
also see stagnation of crop produ ctivity, emergence of multiple fertilizer responsive 
genotypes , increasing the fertilizer use. So , one of the major reason for cutler,  customize d 
fertilizer development is there is an imbalanced use of fertilizer in intensive agriculture. So , 
we need to de velop and customize d fertilizers spe cific to the need of the crop; s econdly, 
continuous increase of secondar y and micronutrient deficiency.  
So, we can see for last couple of decades , we can see the number of deficient fertilizer  
elements is increasing  and as a result, we have to use this customized  fertilizer . We cannot 
only rely on this NPK anymore. Second, third is stagnation of crop productivity ; we can see 
that there is a stagnation of crop productivity , it is not increasing. So to increase it, we have to 
take a holistic measurement and customized  fertilizer is one o f them; then, emergence of 
multi -fertilizer responsive genotypes. So , nowadays genotypes have been developed which 
are resp onsive to multiple fertilizers.  
So, that is why we need the customiz ed fertilizer. Then , we need to increase the fertilizer use 
efficiency , we need to increase or improve the soil health , then we need to reduce the fertilizer based input cost by applying a customized fertilizer . And finally, but not the least, 
that is envi ronmental pollution. So , judicious application of fertilizer in the soil can redu ce 
the environmental pollution.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:20)  
 
Now, the next question comes to our mind why farmers prefer customized fertilizers. There 
are several reasons . First of all, the better  crop quality and productivity . Because , when you 
apply the customized  fertilizer based on the need for the local crop and the particular site, it 
can improve the crop quality as well as the crop productivity. It can also maximize the 
nutrient use efficiency and these customized  fertilizer s are specific to crop a n area based on 
soil fertility. It, t hey are available in ready to use form  in balanced way , and they can improve 
soil fertility.  
They are environmental friendly, and they can be  adapted to various field application. So , 
these are the reason for which farmers generally  prefer customized fertilizers.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:19)  
 
Now, what are the methods of customized fertilizer manufacturing? There are basically three 
methods of customized  fertilizer production . First of all , bulk b lending, second is compound 
granulation  or steam granulation  and third one is complex or chemical granulation . Generally, 
bulk blending is the simplest process and complex or chemical granulation is the complex 
process. So , as we move from the bulk blending to compound granulation  or steam 
granulation  to complex or chemical granulation , the complexity of t he processes process 
increased.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:57)  
 
Now , what is bulk blending? Bulk  blending  is defined as the mechanical mixing of two or 
more granular fertilizer materials to produce mixtures containing nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and other essential plant nutrients. So , this is called the bulk blending . In the bulk 
bending , what we are doi ng? W e are basically mixing two or more granular fertilizer 
materials to produce mixtures containing nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and o ther essential 
plant nutrients.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:33)  
 
Then, steam granulation is another process . Now, what is g ranulation ? Granulation is  a part 
of the value chain and a process that increases the particle size , reduces loss and grand  
guarantees more precision in field application of fertilizers. So basically, here we can 
increase the particle size , we can reduce t he loss (fat) fertilizer loss  and guarantee more 
precision in the field application of the fertilizer  of fertilizers granulation create the final 
product. Now, steam granulation is a modification on wet granulation , and steam is use d as a 
binder instead of  water.  
And this process has many benefits. It offers higher distribution uniformity, a higher 
diffusion rate into powders , and more favo urable thermal balance during the drying. So , what 
happens in case of thermal granulation? H ere steam we use as a bindi ng material instead of 
water. Now , this process of same granulation as many benefits last, just like it offers higher 
distribution, uniform distribution, then higher diffusion rate into the powder , and more 
favourable thermal bal ance during the drying proc ess. (Refer Slide Time: 14:57)  
 
Now, what are the advantages of customized  fertilizers? First of all , customized  fertilizer 
ensure best  fertilizers management practices and are generally assumed  to maximize the crop 
yield , while minimizing unwanted impac ts on the environment and human health. So 
basically , the crux of the the the advantages of customized  fertilizer is , it increases the crop 
yield while minimizing the unwanted impacts on the environment and human health. 
Secondly, application of customized  fertilizer is compatible with existing farmers system  and 
hence it is generally comfortably accepted by the farmers . 
And thirdly customize d fertilizer satisfies crops, nutritio nal demand and specific to area,  soil 
and growth stage of the plant. So , these are the major bene fits of customized fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:05)  
 Apart from that, as the micronutrients is also added with the granulated NPK fertilizer, the 
plants can absorb the micro -nutrient along with macro -nutrient which prevents nutrien t 
deficiency in plant. Remember that micro -nutrient with the  mixed fertilizer is one of the most 
convenient methods of fertilizer application , and help s in more uniform distribution of 
nutrients with conve ntional application equipments.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:39)  
 
Now, how we can decide the best customized  fertilizer?  Which  one is the best customized  
fertilizer?  Or w hat are the steps of deciding which , which is the best customized  fertilizer? 
First of all, we have to geo -reference the selected area. Second  is we have to select the 
sampling points using appropriate statistical procedure. Thirdly, we have to do the actual 
sampling of sites. After the sampling , we have to analyze the soil plant and water samples for 
nutrients and some soil characteristics. We have  to then define the management z ones; then 
yield  targeting needs to be done in major management zone . 
Then , we have to compute the crop removal of the nutrients , then we have to calculate the 
nutrient requirement. And finally based on the nutrient requ irement will blend nutrient based 
on generated information. So , this is how we can derive the best customized  fertilizer.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:46)  
 
Now , what is the journey of customized  fertili zer in India?  So, in 2005, the C once pt paper in 
Indian Jour nal for F ertilizers and , and this C oncept paper first appeared in Indian Journal 
fertilizer  and it was presented in F ertilizer Association of India seminar . In 2006,  FAI 
working group was developed  and then in 2007, FA I and Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation proposal on this customized  fertilizer first surfaced . And then in 2007, the 
customized  fertilizer formulation and field validation trial in it was executed by Tata , 
Nagarjuna and Deepak fertilizers . 
Then in 2007, series of customized  fertilizer workshop conducted . And then to the in 2008, 
the customized  fertilizer guidelines guideline  issued by government of India in  the on 11th 
March. T hen, in 2008 , DA C approves 12 customized  fertilizer grades;  2009 , Tata initiate 
setting up the high tech custom ized fertilizer plant . And in 2010, Government of India 
support for availability of raw material  and then in 2010 , Tata’s consumer’s  fertilizer plant 
started starts production on 22nd of November 2010. So, this is how the history of 
customized  fertilizer i n India . (Refer Slide Time: 19:28)  
 
Now,  customized formulations in India. So, first for Fertilizer Control Order approved about 
36 formulation of customized  fertilizers so far . At present nearly 1 lakh to nne of customized  
fertilizer is being marketed by  top four  companies of  India.  Who are the important ? Now, the 
question comes who are the important companies in the market , who produce the c ustomize d 
fertilizers ? So, Nagarj una fertilizer is one of them, T ata Chemicals , then Indo Gulf, then 
Coromandel Fer tilizers L imited , and Deepak  fertilizers . So, these are the major players of 
customized fertilizers in India.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:11)  
 
Now, let us see some examples of customized  fertilizer. So, there is NPKZnS that is top 14, 
27, 10, 4,  0.5. So, this i s a customized fertilizer ; it is used for P addy in eastern Andhra Pradesh, whic h is manufactured by Nagarjuna F ertilizers . Then, NPKZnSB is ZnSB, s o, we 
have zinc (su lf) sulphide and boron . So, we have 20, 0, 15, 0, 0.2 So, we can see 20 percent  
nitrogen , 15 perc ent K2O.  And then we have 0.2 percent  of boron for Paddy and Maize  in 
middle Andhra  Pradesh , which is produced by the Coromandel Fertilizer Limited.  
So, these fertilizer manufacturing basically involves the mixing and crushing of urea, the di -
ammoni um phosphate, Muriate of P otash, zinc sulph ide, and bentonite  sulph ur, and boron 
granules, for obtaining the  desired proportion of NPK, sulph ur and other micro -nutrients. So, 
these are some examples of customized  fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:29)  
 
 
So, let us see what are the different customized  fertilizer formulations , which are available in 
India. S o, if you can see the wheat, so  these are the formulations like 10 , 18, 25, 3, 5; s o, these are available for these geographical area . Then sugarcane, we have 7 , 20, 18, 6, 0.5, 0 
which are available in Moradabad , KR Nagar,  Farukhabad . So, similarly for rice , ground nut, 
maize,  potato , and for paddy , ment ha, (soup ) grapes , sugarcane , paddy and then maize , and 
basal ground nut; so, all these are having thei r own formulations . And there is restricted 
geographical areas , where these are , these customized  fertili zers are useful.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:19)  
 
Now, let us see effect of customized  fertilizer on yield attributes and yield of rice . So, we can 
see here  two location s pooled ; so, if we consider that these T 7 that is 100 percent  of 
recommended dose of fertilizer plus customized  fertilizer ; we can see the nu mber of 
productive tillers per h ill increased as compared to the the only the recommended dose of 
fertilizers . And then we can see that panicle length is also increased , filled  grains per panicle 
also increased as compared to the other treatments . Grain yield , you can see highest grain 
yield you  can see here in case of this combined recommended dose of fertilizers,  plus a 
customized fertilizer.  
So, we can see that around 22 percent  increase in yield over the control. So, this is an 
example of effect of customized  fertilizer on yield of rice.  (Refer Slide Time: 23:21)  
 
So, this is again effective customiz ed fertilizer on, on soil ; available nutrients after harvest of 
rice. You can see in this T 7, which can which has 100 percent  RDF as CF  two, which is 
basically 10 0, 50, 50, 25; that is NPK zinc as mixed fertilizers . So, we can see that when we 
are using th ese, we are getting the highest organic carbon of 5.7 kg gram per kg  and we are 
getting the highest nitrogen of 343 kg per hectare. We are getting the almost high very very 
high ava ilable phosphate; that is that 3 5.7. And  potash that is highest 543 kg per hector.  So, 
you can see these are the benefits of using the customized fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:22)  
 
Also, you can see effect of customized  fertilizer on growth, yield  attributes , and yield of  
wheat . You can see that when we are using the custom ized for 150 percent  of the customized fertilizer dose, w e are getting the plant height that is 89.4 centimeters; so, the highest height 
we are getting . Then, effective tillers , we are getting highest that is 372.7 tillers per square 
meter  and then spikele t length also is the highest in case of the customized  fertilizer, plus 
RDF . And then test weight is also highest among all the treatments  and then grain yield. We 
can see it is also highest in case of combined RDF. You know customize d fertilizer dose 150 
percent  of the customized  fertilizer dose.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:22)  
 
We can see here effect of customized  fertilizer on yield attributes and yield of onion.  So, we 
can see that when there is an 100 percent c ustomized  fertilizer dose in three equal split,  we 
can get the plant height of highest plant height that is 57.7 centimeter . And we can have the 
highest yield 22.3 tonne per hectare  and then we are getting the fertilizer use efficiency that is 
22.2. So , also when we are using  this 100 percent  of custom ized fertilizer in  two equal split , 
we can get the green leaves  of; we can get the green leaves highest green leaves of 13 tonne 
per hectare. So, you can see these are the benefits of applica tion of customized fertilizers.  (Refer Slide Time: 26:16)  
 
Also , we can see effect of customized  fertilizer on soil available nutrients after harvest of 
soybean. We can see here that when we are using the customized  fertilizer , we are getting t he 
highest available nutrients.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:30)  
 
This slide show s the effect of customized  fertilizer on leaf chlorophyll of m ulberry, and you 
can clearly see that when we are using the customized fertilizer that can increase the the 
chlorophyll content leaf, chlorophyll content of m ulberry  and you can see the differen ces. (Refer Slide Time: 26:51)  
 
 
So guys, this makes the end of this lecture number 42. I hope we have learned about these 
customized  fertilizer and their benefits. And these are the references for this lectur e. Let us 
wrap up this lecture  and let us me et in our next lecture to discuss more about the fertilizer 
control and fertilizer quality. Thank you.  