Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 0 4 
Importance of Soil Nutrient Management and Basic Soil Plant Relationship  
Welcome friends to thi s fourth lecture of week one of NPTEL online certification course of Soil 
Fertility and Fertilizers . And in this week we are talking about importance of soil nutrient 
management and basic soil plant relationship . Now in our previous three lectures we have 
discussed about the basics of  plant nutrition , we have also discussed the criteria for essentiality 
we have classified the nutrient based on their relative amount required as well as based on their 
essentiality .  
We have seen  different types of deficiency symptoms of plants and we have also discussed the 
chelates and different aspects of nutrient cycling . We have discussed some important principles 
like law of minimum , law of diminishing return and also we have discussed about the law of 
maximum . Now in thi s week we are going to discuss the following concepts .  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:22)  
 
These are the nutrient uptake mechanisms we are going to discuss , also we have we are going to 
discuss the active uptake and passive uptake and finally we are going to talk  about the plant root 
soil iron exchange . These are all important concepts as far as the plant nutrition is concerned .  (Refer Slide Time: 1:42)  
 
So these are some of the keywords which we are going to discuss in this lecture diffusion , mass 
flow, root i nterception , symport , antiport so we are going to discuss all these important terms in 
this lecture .  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:59)  
 
So let us start with the mechanism of nutrient uptake . Now you know that nutrients are absorbed 
by root , roots as ions from th e soil water or soil solution . Now there are couple of ways through 
which these nutrients are absorbed  by the plant roots . The first mechanism is diffusion , so diffusion is a process in which  the that supports the movement of iron from a zone of high 
conce ntration to a zone of low concentration .  
Now in case of soil the ions are generally , the ions show their movement from the higher 
concentration to lower concentration so they create a concentration gradient . And this diffusion 
process is  mainly helpful fo r short distances and of course these are  very useful for immobile 
nutrients . Now these diffusion process is very important for nutrients such as phosphorus and 
potassium that are strongly retained  by soil and present at very low concentration in soil solu tion.  
So the nutrient uptake by the plant roots for phosphorus and potassium is mainly governed 
through this diffusion process .  
(Refer Slide time: 03:41)  
 
Now this diffusion process generally follows the Fick's law . So in soil the nutrients will always 
diffuse from a higher concentration to lower concentration and a depletion zone is produced 
when the concentration of nutrient is lowered near the root surface due to root absorption . So if 
we follow the diffusion I mean the Fick’s  law it is clear that thi s is the Fick's law that is F equal 
to minus D into dC by dX  where F  is basically the diffusion of flux and D  stands for the 
diffusivity coefficient and C  is the concentration of soil concentration of nutrient and X  is the 
distance and dc by dx is the conc entration gradient .  So you can see , if you  see this plot the x axis shows the distance between the ions as well as the 
plant root and here you can see that C  stands for the concentration of ions in a soil solution . And 
here we see this concentration gradi ent that is the ions will always move from higher 
concentration to lower concentration . So this gradient is denoted by this dC by dX.  And since the 
movement of ion generally occurs from the higher concentration to lower concentration we 
generally  indicate it by a negative sign . So this is the diffusion  law and given by F ick and so  
nutrients in soil follows this law for movement from soil solution to the plant root .  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:51)  
 
Now the next important mechanism is called the mass flow mechani sm. Now mass flow is 
basically movement of ions in soil solution as water moves . Now this process is most significant 
for nutrient that are relatively soluble in water . So what are the nutrients which are highly soluble 
in water ? Like nitrate , sulphate , you know that nitrate and sulphate are the two plant available 
forms for nitrogen and sulfur . So these two nutrients mainly  move in soil in ionic form through 
the process of mass flow . The third I  mean and another important point regarding mass flow is 
this mass flow generally  is useful for longer distances and for mobile nutrients .  
The third important process is root interception in the root interception process the root generally 
grows to the nutrient and nutrients are taken up as a result of direct contac t between roots and 
soil particles . And this type of uptake is not very efficient because roots have direct contact with 
less than one percent of the soil . So these are the three major mechanism through which the nutrients are uptaken by the plant roots . First one is diffusion , second one is mass flow and the 
third one is new root interception .  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:25)  
 
So if you see the relative importance of soil supply mechanism or this nutrient supply 
mechanism then you can see that for nitrogen majo rly this nitrogen is supplied to mass flow and 
phosphorus is majorly or mainly supplied through diffusion process potassium is mainly through 
the diffusion process as we have discussed .  
In case of calcium mass flow is important and at the same time calciu m also shows you know 
considerable amount of root interception . Magnesium is mainly through mass flow and sulphur is 
also mainly through mass flow . So this table shows  the relative importance of different 
mechanisms for supplying these  plant nutrients to t he roots .   
(Refer Slide Time: 08:22)  
 
Now remember that when these nutrients are uptaken by the plants these nutrient ions must be 
dissolved in water we call it soil solution . Now they move from soil solution to vascular center of 
plant root passing thr ough at least one cell membrane this is the skin that hold the cells liquid 
contents inside .  
Now this movement across the membrane may be either passive or active movement . So these 
movement of nutrient based on how they are transferred across the membran e, we generally 
divide this process into two major categories one is passive uptake another is active uptake .   
(Refer Slide Time: 09:20)  
 
Now remember another important thing that root volume in 0 to 15 centimeter surface horizon of 
a soil is only 0.5 t o 1 percent . So therefore movement of available nutrients to the plant roots is 
critical . Some example of immobile nutrients like phosphorus and mobile nutrients like nitrate 
and this nutrient uptake is dependent on energy relationship . And this energy rel ationship 
basically you know  takes into account this metabolic energy as well as iron activities in solution 
relative to root . So we are going to discuss this in details in our upcoming slide .  
(Refer Slide time: 10:09)   
So let us start discussing with th e passive uptake . Now passive uptake or passive transport can be 
also called the diffusion process . And happens when molecules move down a concentration that 
is moving from a region of high concentration to a region of low concentration . So just like the 
diffusion generally occurs along the concentration gradient this passive uptake always goes 
through I mean always also occur  along these concentration gradient .  
So here , in this picture it is quite clear that through this diffusion process the nutrients ar e 
moving across this plasma membrane . So this is a process of diffusion so this is a inside the plant 
root and this is outside the plant root . So here you can see the concentration of the nutrients 
outside the plant root that is in the soil solution is qui te high and here through the diffusion 
process the movement of ions or nutrients can be seen so this is a diffusion process .  
Sometimes this diffusion has to be facilitated through some carrier proteins . Now, in both these 
diffusion as well as this facilit ated diffusion through carrier proteins are combine ly termed as 
passive transport .  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:50)   
  
So let us discuss what are these carrier proteins . Now the remember that the plasma membrane is 
completely impermeable to some ions so here you can see although in case of diffusion simple 
diffusion process these nutrients can move freely from outside of the plant root to the inside of 
the plant root . However there are some elements or nutrients which cannot pass through 
diffusion simple diffu sion process .  
They need some  you know they needs this facilitated diffusion . So because the plasma 
membrane is completely impermeable to these ions . So the as a result the absorption of these 
ions is facilitated by some special proteins on the plasma memb rane and they are called carrier 
proteins . Carrier proteins generally combine with the ions to form the carrier iron complex .  
So here you can see these are mineral ions and this is the carrier protein inside the plasma 
membrane and these are some of the b inding sites , so these binding sides will bind these ions . So 
they will create this carrier protein ion complex and ultimately they will  reach towards the inside 
of the plant root they will release these nutrients inside the cell . And then again they will  go back 
to get more mineral ions . So these are the examples of this carrier proteins .  
Now this carrier ion complex which we have seen can move across this plasma moment and 
when the carrier ion complex reaches the inner surface of the membrane they releas e the ions 
into the lumen of the cell . Now after this these carrier proteins go back to the outer surface to 
accept the new ones . So this is a cyclic process through which the carrier proteins continuously take up these mineral ions form this carrier prote in ion complex and then release those ions to the 
lumen of the cell .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:00)  
 
Now this carrier proteins can be based on their mechanism of transport . This carrier proteins can 
be differentiated  into three major types one is uniporter se cond is symporter and third is 
antiporter . So here these antiport proteins exchange the solutes by transporting them in and out of 
the cell . The main function of uniport  is to uniport  protein is to carry single solute across the 
membrane . And simple protei ns transfer two different solutes simultaneously in the same 
direction .  
So symporter and deporter can shows the importance of co transporter . Because here  two 
different  solutes are being  moved one in case of symporter we can see that they are moved in the  
same direction . However in case of antiporter they move in different direction .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:16)   
  
The next important concept is active uptake . Now this active transport is a mode of 
transportation in the plants which uses the stored energy to move the particles against the 
concentration gradient . In a plant cell it takes place in the root cells by absorbing water and 
minerals . Now depending on the mode of operation these carrier proteins are of three types .  
The first one is called the unipo ter carrier protein , the second one is called the synporter carrier 
protein and the third one is called the antiporter carrier proteins . Now this antiporter carrier 
proteins exchange , these antiporter carrier proteins exchange solutes by transporting them in and 
out of the cell . And this main function of this uniport protein is to carry the single solute across 
the membrane . And syn port protein transfer two different solute simultaneously in the same 
direction .  
So we can see that in case of synport protein  or antibody protein  two different  solutes are 
simultaneously moved together so these are known as also co transporters . So let us discuss what 
is active transport now active transport is a mode of transpiration in plants which uses stored 
energy to move t he particles against the concentration gradient . Now in a plant cell it takes place 
in the root cell by absorbing water and minerals .  
So here you can clearly see that this is the cytoplasm and this is the extracellular fluid . And the 
here in this case the  active transport generally occurs by spending some amount of energy from the ATP and ultimately creating ADP plus pi . If you go back to the previous slide we can clearly 
see the difference between the passive uptake and active uptake.  
In case of passive uptake we have seen that the concentration of the solutes are higher and the 
movement of the solutes you know  generally goes from higher concentration to the lower 
concentration so this is a diffusion process . And also here in case of facility diffusion we  also 
seen that  the movement of iron was facilitated by some carrier proteins although the movement 
of iron was along the concentration gradient .  
However in case of active transport we can see that the movement of ions against the 
concentration gradient . Here we can see inside the cell the concentration is more as compared to 
the outside the cell . So here they are moving  against the concentration gradient and these 
movement is facilitated by some energy or ATP , so this is called the active transport . So just 
because of this  active  transport  uses the stored energy to move the particles against the 
concentration gradient .  
(Refer Slide time: 19:05)  
 
Now active transport is also of two types one is called the primary active transport and other is 
called the s econdary active transport . Now in case of primary active transport the cells use the 
breakdown of ATP for primary active transport and energy from cellular membrane pumps such as the sodium potassium pumps . As you can see here this is called the sodium pot assium pumps 
creates enough energy to move the molecules across the membrane .  
So this is known as the primary active transport . What is secondary active transport cellular 
process that use secondary active transport require leftover energy stores from pri mary active 
transport this energy is stored in electrochemical gradients as a primary active transport as a 
primary active transfer occurs via carrier protein a secondary active transport may share the 
carrier protein and energy it uses to transport a seco nd molecule . So this is the major  you know 
features of these are the major features of active transport or active uptake .  
(Refer Slide time: 20:16)  
 
So let us see what are the major differences between active transport and passive transport . So in 
case o f active transport the solid molecule moves across a membrane against a concentration 
gradient with the help of carrier proteins . And in case of passive uptake ions move into the plant  
down an energy concentration gradient without expending energy by the c ell.  
The second important point is in case of active transport energy is required however in case of 
passive transport there is no energy required . In case of active transport and active chemical non 
it is generally it is generally indicated it is a activ e chemical and non spontaneous process 
however the passive transport is a passive physical and spontaneous process .  In case of active transport movement of mineral ion does not proceed towards the equilibrium 
constant however in case of passive transport movement of mineral ions does proceed towards 
the equilibrium constraint . In case of active transport it causes salt accumulation in the cells 
however in case of passive transport it does not cause salt accumulation in the cells .  
In case of active transpo rt rate of mineral absorption is dependent on respiration however in case 
of acid transport rate of mineral absorption is independent of respiration . So these are some of 
the major differentiating characteristics between active transport or passive transpo rt.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:51)  
 
Now let us discuss the third important concept , third exchange , the third important process of 
nutrient uptake that is Contact Exchange or I on contact or ion contact exchange . So this 
according to this contact exchange theo ry the ions adsorbed on the surface of the root cells and 
clay particles in continuous  oscillation when they are in close contact .  
So generally this theory believes that the ions which are adsorbed on the surface of the root cells 
and clay particles are c ontinuously oscillating when they are when they come in close contact . 
An oscillation radius of the ions on the clay particles may overlap with the ions adsorbed on the 
root cells . And when the oscillation radius overlap there is a possibility of spontaneo us exchange 
of ions between clay particles and root surface . So this is how these ion exchange  you know  
occurs in case of contact exchange process .   
(Refer Slide Time: 23:08)  
 
Now remember that another  theory is it is called carbonic acid exchange theor y where it 
postulates that if cations are taken up then other cations must be released into soil solution to 
maintain the balance generally it is H  plus. So here you can see when the cation K  plus is being 
taken up by the root they are releasing these H  plus to maintain the ionic balance or charge 
balance .  
So on the other hand if anions are taken up then other anions must be released into the soil 
solution generally it is hydroxyl . So due to the due to the release of these H  plus and hydroxyl 
ions they we can see some major changes in rhizospheric ph . So this is carbonic acid exchange 
theory .   
(Refer Slide Time: 24:07)  
 
Now of course based on the nutrient mobility and plant competition the zone of plant uptake of 
immobile nutrients and immobile nutrients  from the soil and mobile nutrients from the soil varies 
widely . So here you can see these is the zone of uptake of immobile nutrients from the soil 
however the zone of uptake of mobile nutrient from the soil is quite large . And these are for 
nitrate sulph ate chlorine and  also for boron . And in case of phosphorus calcium magnesium zinc 
and iron  they are basically immobile nutrients so the zone of plant uptake is quite less .  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:57)   
And based on that we can see the root patterns differ f rom one crop to another crop . So here you 
can see this is the root of potato then sugar wheat then soybean then small grains and corns and 
alpha , how they are changing based on these  nutrient uptake mechanisms .  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:21)  
 
Now mass flow an d diffusion  can occur simultaneously . So mass flow and diffusion occurs  
simultaneously to supply the nutrients to plant roots and cannot be treated as separate process . 
Now Nye and Spie rs in 1964 they first presented a  partial differential equation to desc ribe the simultaneous mass flow and diffusion . And this equation becomes the foundation of most 
mechanistic nutrient uptake model .  
Now later the same two scientists revised this continuity equation proposed by them in 1964 to 
describe the flux of nutrient s in the soil to the root surface with the nutrient concentration in the 
soil solution . So they related the concentration of the solute to its distance from the root surface 
and the absorption time . In terms of diffusion characteristics of the solute in th e soil, the 
movement of the solvent and the absorbing power of the root .   
(Refer Slide Time: 26:26)  
 
So this is the  mathematical formulation given by Nye and Marriott in 1969 . So here r stands for 
the radial distance from the root axis in centimeter and  capital D  stands for the differential 
diffusion coefficient of solute in soil and then C  one stands for the concentration of iron in the 
soil solution . And here v 0 and v small v 0 stands for and also stands for the inward flux of water 
at radius r zero a nd so small b shows the differential buffer p ower. S o this is how this 
mathematical formulation  basically shows the simultaneous occurrence of diffusion and mass 
flow.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:28)   
They Nye and T inker in 1977 given a model shows you know wh ich shows the uptake of 
nutrient per unit length . So this is basically given by this two pi r  then alpha c one where these r 
stands for the radius of the root and alpha stands for the root absorbing power and c one stands 
for the ion concentration at the r oot surface .  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:02)  
 
So these are some of the models which shows the mechanistic  nutrient uptake models .  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:10)   
So, guys let us wrap up this lecture here and we will discuss more about this mechanistic models 
and other aspects of plant  nutrition in our last lecture of this week . Thank you very much .  