Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture  45  
Fertilizer Quality Control, Fertilizer Adulteration and Fertilizer Testing (Cont d.) 
(Refer Sli de Time:  0:16) 
 
Welcome friends to this 45th lecture of NPTEL  online certification course of Soil Fertility 
and Fertilizers . And in this week,  we are talking about fertilizer  quality control , fertilizer 
adulteration  and fertilizer testing. Now, in the pre vious lectures we have discussed about 
several slow release  fertilizer,  customized  fertilizer s and also, we have discussed about 
controlled release micronutrient fertilizer and also, we have discussed about the specification 
as per the fertilizer  control o rder for different fertilizer s. Now, we have also discussed 
fortified fertilizer s also. Now , in this lecture number 45 , we are going to discuss these 
following concepts.  (Refer Slide Time:  1:09) 
 
First of all, we are going to discuss about the fertilize r quality control in India. Secondly, we 
are going to discuss the restriction on manufacture, manufacture then import or sale of 
fertilizers  and then we are going to discuss major problems in fertilizer  quality control, then 
enforcement agencies for qualit y control and finally, we are going to discuss what are the 
weaknesses and remedial measures in quality control of fertilizer s.  
(Refer Slide Time:  1:33) 
 
These are some of the keywords for this lecture. First of all, fertilizer  control order FCO then 
essential commodity act or ECA then fertilizer  policies then fertilizer  control laboratories and 
fertilizer  adulteration. We are going to talk about these terms in this lecture.  (Refer Slide Time:  1:51) 
 
 
Now, let us first start about fertilizer  quality co ntrol in India. Now, before we discuss the 
fertilizer  quality control, we have to remember that India contributes 12.1  percent  of world’s 
fertilizer  production and 12.6  percent  of world consumption that is third largest producer and 
consumer of fertilizer s. Generally,  India imports  DAP or diammonium phosphate and myriad 
potash, that is entire potassium inputs. And apart from that it also inputs some small quantity 
of urea which is a nitrogenous fertilizer . About 20 grades of various fertilizers  are produced  
in 58, major nitrogen and phosphorus manufacturing units and 73 single super phosphate 
manufacturing units . About 36.56 million tonnes of fertilizer  material  are distributed t hrough  
a network of 2.83 lack dealers of both private and institutional channel . So, you can see there 
is a huge network and huge amount of fertilizers  are being sold in India and also 
manufactured in India.  (Refer Slide Time:  3:10) 
 
Now, let us see the essential commodities act of 1955. Now, this essential commodity act, 
commoditie s act or ECA was enacted by the parliament in 1955. Under this act Government 
is empowered to empowered to regulate production, supply and distribution, trade and 
commerce of commodities essential for sustenance of commandment . So,  whatever a 
commodity is required for subsistence or sustenance of the common man they are come they 
come under these essential commodities act . Fertilizer with  its complex linkage with 
agricultural development has been declared as one of the essential commodities . So,  of 
course, these fertilizer , quality control of the fertilizer  comes under  these essential commodity 
acts.  
(Refer Slide Time:  4:12) 
 Now, what is fertilizer  quality control? So, under these the essential commodities act the 
central government makes the fertilizer  control order which ensures registration of fertilizer  
manufacturers . So, they ensure that manufacture of the fertilizer  are properly registered and 
also importers are properly registered , dealers are properly registers. They also in the FCO  we 
can see the specification of all the fertilizers , regulation on manufacture of fertilizer  mixture, 
then packing on labelling of the bags, appointment of enforcement agencies then setting up of 
quality control laboratories and then prohibition on manufacture or import and sale of non-
standard  fertilizer  and penal provisions . So,  you can see it is a comprehensive law which 
covers all aspects of fertilizer,  starting from fertilizer  dealer to fertilizer  production to 
fertilizer  quality control and also the penal provision.   
(Refer Slide Time:  5:15) 
 
Now, the fertilizer  quality control order or FCO was in a verse  of the essential commodities 
act was originally introduced in 1957 and subsequently revised in 1985. And these fertilizer  
quality controls order specifically provi des for compulsory registration of fertilizer  makers, 
importers and sellers . Then specifications for all fertilizer  produced imported or sold in India 
and a set of regulations on the manufacture of fertilizer  mixtures . So,  you can see that the 
registration  is compulsory for all the makers , importers and sellers and specifications of 
fertilizers  are also provided in the FCO and set of regulation on the manufacture of fertilizer  
mixtures.  (Refer Slide Time:  6:11) 
 
Also , packing and labelling of fertilizer  bags, appointment of enforcement agencies as I have 
talked previously, and also banning of the manufacture or import on sale of non-standard  
spurious or adulterated fertilizer . Now here , comes the fertilizer  adulteration . So, we can see 
there is a huge amo unt of fertilizer  adulteration in the black market and also illegal holding of 
the fertilizer , storage of the fertilizer . So, these type of things illegal things are being 
controlled in the fertilizer  control order . So,  the generally there is a provision f or banning 
these manufacturer or importers  of these non-standard  spurious or adulterated fertilizer  which 
is provided in the fertilizer  control order.  
(Refer Slide Time:  6:58) 
  
 
Now, let us see what are the fertilizer  policies provided in this fertili zer control order? Now, 
let us see the restriction on manufacturer or importer seller fertilizer s. So, the manufacturer or 
the manufacturer , import , sale and stock distribution is completely privatized  under clause 19 
for fertilizer , which is not of prescr ibed standards . So,  we cannot manufacture , we cannot 
import , we cannot sell , we cannot stock or we can distribute the fertilizer , which is not a 
prescribed standard, which is not packed and marked as specified , which is adulterated, 
whose label or containe r gives  fictitious  address of manufacturer or any false or misleading 
information , whose label or container does not exhibit the proper grade and which is in fact 
not a fertilizer . So, these are the condition where there is a restriction on manufacturing, 
importing and selling of the fertilizer .  (Refer Slide Time:  8:05) 
 
Now, for if how we can quickly detect the adulteration of fertilizer s. Now , for effective 
enforcement of quality of the fertilizer , the government of India has set up fertilizer  control 
laboratories to test the fertilizer  samples drawn by fertilizer  inspectors. However, some 
qualitative test procedures have been developed by the central fertilizer  quality control and 
training Institute which is located at Faridabad which can help the farm ers to know if the 
fertilizer  is genuine or adulterated . So,  we need to set a standard we need a set of detection 
methods which can tell us whether that fertilizer  is genuine or adulterated . So,  there are 
certain qualitative test procedures which can say t hat whether that fertilizer  is genuine or 
adulterated.  
(Refer Slide Time:  8:58) 
 Now, remember that these are simple tests and only can indicate if the product is genuine or 
adulterated. But the extent of deficiency will not be known. And also, it may no t lead to the 
prosecution of offender in a court of law. However, it may forewarn  the farmer to be careful 
from those dealers or suspected material . So,  in the FCO, we can get these clear guidelines  
and these clear indication of how to detect quickly detec t the fertilizer  adulteration and in that 
way, we can be careful about those fertilizers  and respected dealers and the mat erial.  
(Refer Slide Time:  9:46) 
 
So, the samples are drawn randomly for analysis in the laboratories of the manufacturer. And 
these samples are drawn from various storage points or warehouses and also from the 
company’s dealers on a regular basis  to keep a check on the quality of the fertilizer . Now , 
analytical reports of such samples are reviewed on a regular basis.  (Refer Slide Tim e: 10:10 ) 
 
Now, let us also see what are the adulteration of the fertilizer . Now , as of today, it is reported 
that despite the above measures, like the quick detection of fertilizer  adulteration and FCO 
guidelines, there is still adulteration of fertilize r, which is rampant in many states of India, 
and farmers are suffering great losses. Now , adulteration of fertilizer  involves the practice of 
adding extraneous material to a standard fertilizer  to lower its quality.  
(Refer Slide Time:  10:45 ) 
 
Now, if fertilizers  generally say to be adulterated, when it contains harmful or deleterious 
ingredient or unwanted crop or weed seeds, in quantities sufficient to harm the plant, when 
applied according to the direction on the label. Now, its composition falls also, its composition falls below or differs from that given on the label and useless extraneous 
materials like salt, sand, soil, ash and other waste materials are added to  it.  
(Refer Slide Time:  11:20 ) 
 
Now , when a complaint is received from the farmers or ot her individual about the 
adulteration of the fertilizer s, the appropriate authorized  law enforcement agency through the 
legal procedure of search and seizure  colleagues the samples and after due process of seizure  
or panchanama, we call it in the presence of two witness sends  the seized samples in sealed 
covers or containers to authorize d laboratories under the essential commodities act of 
fertilizer  control order 1985 or to forensic science laboratories for analysis.  
(Refer Slide Time:  12:01 ) 
 Now, this is how the fertilizer  adult eration  are periodically checked and legal procedures are 
taken against those manufacturers who produce or distribute or sell the adulterated fertilizer s. 
Now what are the major objectives of quality control? First of all, to mon itor or audit the 
quality of fertilizer  and to provide a framework tools and information for helping the user for 
better handling, storage and optimum utilization  of fertilizer  for better productivity.  
(Refer Slide Time:  12:42 ) 
 
Now, what are the major p roblems in quality control? The next question comes to our mind. 
First of all, the adulteration or misbranding is the major problem in quality control. Secondly, 
manufacturing of low-quality  fertilizers  is another major problem when there is a low-quality  
fertilizer , of course the fertilizer  grade which is mentioned there will not be applicable . So,  
there will be deviation from that fertilizer  grade so, that implies the low-quality  fertilizer  also 
short wait a bag . So, suppose a bag is supposed to have 45 k g or 50 kg and instead of that, it 
is only 40 kg or 42 kg then it will call that then it will be called as a deviation from the 
fertilizer  specification . So, that will be a problem of quality control. Also,  black marketing or 
overcharging price is another major problem in quality control.  (Refer Slide Time:  13:48 ) 
 
The following fertilizers  have been identified for adulteration . So, we can see from different 
literature that these are the fertilizer , which are extensively adulterated because of several 
reasons. First of all, fertilizers  and mixtures then single super phosphate then micronutrient 
fertilizers  and DAP and complexes . So,  these are the fertilizers  which are extensively 
adulterated and what are the main reasons ? So, the main reasons are use of l esser quantity of 
ingredients or the ir lower quality or the use of the excess quantity of fillers and non-
homogeneous  mixing. Now, the major reason as the main reasons are lesser quality quantity 
of ingredients . So, when you use lesser quantity of the ingr edients of course, the grade will be 
deviated from the label and also, they are lower quality or use of these excess  quantity of the 
fillers .  
So, fillers are the weight make up materials as we know from the fertilizer  terminology , 
fillers are weight makeu p materials and when we give more amount of weight makeup 
materials or fillers and that can create a problem . And also, when there is a non-homogeneous  
mixing that also is the reason for fertilizer  adulteration.  (Refer Slide Time:  15:20 ) 
 
Now, what are the enforcement agencies for quality control? First of all, Department of 
fertilizer  is the first enforcement agency for quality control then central fertilizer  quality 
control and training institute which is located at Faridabad. Then regional fertilizer  control 
laboratories which is which are situated in Chennai. Then Kalyani , West  Bengal and also 
Mumbai, Maharashtra and State agriculture  departments and then state government quality 
control laboratory . So,  these are some of the enforcement agencies for q uality control of 
fertilizer .  
(Refer Slide Time:  16:02 ) 
 
Now, what are the weaknesses in quality control ? If we see the what are the weaknesses of 
the quality control first of all, there is a lack of full-time inspectors in various state and also multipl icity of grade and then inadequate laboratory facilities another major obstacle for 
quality control of the fertilizer , then drawing samples from non-prone  fertilizer  is another 
major problem , then very low prosecution is another major problem in quality co ntrol of the 
fertilizer , no testing facility for dealers and farmers . So,  this is another major problem for 
fertilizer  quality control and then non participation in training programmes is another major 
problem for fertilizer  quality control. And finally,  non-submission  of reports by state 
government is another weakness of quality control .  
So, we can see it unless we have enough inspectors for in the various states,  we cannot 
monitor the fertilizer  quality and also if there are multiplication multiplicity o f the grades 
then can create another problem . If there is inadequate laboratory facilities  so, we cannot 
measure we can test the fertilizer  for the possible adulteration and also if we draw the 
samples from non-prone  fertilizer , that code  can also create m isrepresentation, very low 
prosecution . So,  legal prosecutions are very limited and as a result, there is reason  major 
weakness in quality control for there is no testing facility available for dealers , fertilizer  
dealers and farmers and then non participa tion in training programme. Whatever training 
programmes are being organized  people do not participate in these training programmes . So, 
that is another major reason and finally non submission of reports by state government is 
another major weakness in qua lity control.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:15 ) 
 
Now, what are the general observation and common errors observed in quality control of 
fertilizer ? First of all, non-role of NPK granulated mixtures , bio and organic fertilizers  by the 
fertilizer  instructors even said categories available at dealer outlets. It is also observed that all the samples drawn at  manufacturing unit manufacturing unit by the concerned fertilizer  
inspectors are found standard whereas the same batch numbers drawn from at the dealer 
points ar e failing in nutrient content with wide variation which cause doubt on the sampling 
procedure at the manufacturing unit.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:59 ) 
 
Now, also we can see that wide variation in first analysis and second analysis which casts 
doubt on whole sampling procedure . So,  if the sampling is erroneous, that can create wide 
variation between first analysis and second analysis, then failure or delay in seizure  of stock 
after non-standard  or Re-analysis . So, that is another problem drawl of non-notified  fertilizers  
and fertilizers  which are not according to specification of FCO that and that is another 
problem . And delay in sending samples to the fertilizer  coding center for analysis is another 
major problem.  (Refer Slide Time:  19:40 ) 
 
We can also see there is a clear lack of monitoring on carrying on fertilizer  business by the 
dealers even after expiry or validity of source and non-submission  of fourth  portion samples 
of NPK granulated mixtures , SSP micronutrients . So,  these are the some of the major 
problems and issues for in fertilizer , in quality control of the fertilizers . 
(Refer Slide Time:  20:08 ) 
 
And what are the remedial measures then ? First of all, we need full time regular inspectors 
and then renationalization  of product pattern and then impr oved monitoring system for 
granulated NPK mixtures, then sampling design and adequate training so that there will be no 
misrepresentation, then setting up of input diagnostics entered by the entrepreneurs . And then 
popularizing  the quick testing kits for q uick detection of adulteration in the field and creating awareness amongst farmers for use  of consumer forums . So,  these are some of the remedial 
measures which you can take for quality control of the fertilizer s. So, guys, you have seen the 
major issues o f fertilizer  quality control . 
And we have also discussed the fertilizer  quality control and then ECA  essential commodities 
act and how we can what are the practical problems for implementing the fertilizer  quality 
control? And also, what are what do you un derstand by fertilizer  adulteration? What are the 
ways to which we can detect the fertilizer  adulteration quickly . So, we have already discussed 
and I hope that you have gathered some useful knowledge from this lecture. And if you have 
any question, please  put your question in the forum and we will  be happy to answer your 
queries and also you can email me and I will be happy to answer your queries.  
And this marks the end of week 9 lectures where we have comprehensively discussed some 
of the current develop ment in the fertilizer  industry, fortified fertilizer , customized  fertilizer s, 
then, we have also discussed about the micronutrient , bio micronutrients and also, we have 
discussed about direct benefit transfer . So,  direct benefit transferred and fertilizer  quality 
control. And we can see that government of India has taken several important steps for 
preventing the preventing the leakage or the mis appropriation or the mis or adulteration of 
the fertilizer  by enacting several policies like DBT and also fertilizer quality control. And 
there are clear guidelines which you can follow to maintain the quality of the fertilizers  and to 
check whether our fertilizers  are adulterated or not.  
In that way, our farmers interest will be safeguarded and they will be able to use the best 
quality product for enhancing their soil fertility and productivity. Thank you very much. Let 
us meet in our next week of lectures.  
 