Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture – 49 
Biofertilizers and Management of Fertilizers and Manures in Soil (Contd.)  
Hello students. Today we are going to start anot her new lecture, lecture number -49 of our 
NPTE L online certification course of soil fertility and fertilizers. And in this week 10 , we are 
discussing about biofertilizers and management of fertilizers  and manure. In this wee k in this 
week , we are discussing different types of management practices as far as the soil fertility is 
concerne d. We have already discussed bio fertilizers ; we have already discussed biochar . In the 
last lecture we have discussed about mulching . And in t his lecture we are going to discuss in 
details about a new liquid fertilizer or nano -fertiliz er which is produced by Indian Farmers 
Fertilizer and Cooperative L imited or IFFCO.  So, these are the concepts which we are going to 
cover in this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:21)  
  
First of all, we are going to first cover working principle of IFFCO  nano urea. So, they have 
created this nano fertilizer ; we call it nano urea . And then use the efficiency of nano urea , and 
then benefits from IFFCO  nano urea, then  certification for IFFCO  nano urea , and safety 
precautions and general  instructions. Now, again, the full name of IFFCO  is Indian Farmers 
Fertilizers a nd Cooperative Limited . Now, so these are the important concepts of nano urea, 
which is a novel urea fert ilizer for crop application we are going to discuss . Now, these are the 
keywords nano urea , FCO , nitrogen use efficiency , testing of Nano Agri -inputs,  and also water 
soluble fertilizer; s o these are the key words for this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time : 02:30) 
 Now, if IFFCO has crea ted this nano urea  which is a liquid urea , which is a boon towards 
sustainable agriculture. There are several reasons that people;  I mean the farmer should use these 
nano urea because it has got several benefits . And we are going to  discuss those benefits . This 
nano urea liquid nano urea generally comes  in bottles , which are available  in the market for 
procurement.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:05)  
 
Now, IFFCO  nano urea is the on ly nano fertilizer approved by G overnment of India and include d 
in the Fertilizer Control Order ; we have discussed our Fertilizer Control Order in our last week 
of lectures. Now, it is developed and patented by IFFCO . Remember that application of one 
bottle of nano urea can effectively replace at least one bag of ure a, solid urea fertilizer . So, not 
only it is reducing the handling problems of urea , but also it can be also  it has other benefits over 
using the solid urea fertilizers which we are going to discuss . (Refer Slide Time: 04:03)  
 
Now, t his nano urea general ly provides nitrogen without environmental hazards. It has got higher 
use efficiency than granular urea ; and it requires less as per volume . So, first of all , it is it 
provides nitrogen without any environmental hazard . Because , whenever we apply the urea 
fertilizer in the soil , we apply in high quantity . And, and and of course , the majority  of that 
applied  urea gets washed away with water , and they leach down ; and ultimately goes to the 
groundwater . And they create different types of and also they move to different types of water 
bodies creating different types of envir onmental problems.  
However, the n ano urea can produce , nano  urea is devoid of those environmental hazards. So, 
you can you expect the nitrogen fertilization of the crop without creating any e nvironmental 
hazard. Secondly, higher us e efficiency than granular urea.  Whenever  you are using the granular 
urea, you can get a use e fficiency varying from 30 to 40 percent or 45 percent . However, you can 
get higher nutrient use efficiency when you are us ing the Nano urea.  Third is, it  is required in 
less quantity tha n solid urea fertilizers.  (Refer Slide Time: 05:42)  
 
So, if you compare the particle size of solid urea fertilizers or  the urea prills,  and the particle size 
of the nano urea, you can see th at nano urea has particle size of 32 nanometer . And the normal 
urea pre new partic les have the particle size of 1 to 3 millimeter . And so  basically , you can see 
that these nano urea has more surface area as compared to the more surface area as compared to 
the urea particles ; almost 10,000 times more surface area . And when there is a more surface area , 
it is always beneficial.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:38)  
  
Now, let us see more details about IFFCO nano  urea. Now, IFFCO  nano urea is a 
nanot echnology based rev olutionary Agri -input which provides nitrogen to the plant . And this 
liquid IFFCO nano  urea is world's first nano fertilizer , which has been notified by Fertilizer 
Control Order  of 1985 . And nano urea contains 4 percent  of total nitrogen ; and nano nitrogen  
particle size varies from 20 to 50 nanometer ; and these particles are evenly dispersed in water. 
So, if you see that the particle size generally vary from around for 20 to 50 and nanometer ; and 
these particles  are evenly dispersed in water.  
So, this fulfi lls the plan t nutrient requirement as a fertilizer since  nano urea is bio  available to 
plants, because of his desirable particle size about for about which  varies from 20 to 50 
nanometer. A nd more surface area we have already discussed , it has got more 10 ,000 times more 
surface area tha n the normal urea and number of particles . So, 55,000 nitrogen  particles 
compared to 1 millimeter urea prill . So, you can s ee that it it fulfills the plan t nutrients  because of 
its desirable particle size , and higher surface area; and also more number of particles  because of 
its nano structure.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:26)  
 
Now, nano urea generally increases  its avail ability to crop by more than 80 percent  resulting in 
higher nutrient use efficiency. So, if you see if you compa re the nutrient use efficiency of normal 
urea fertilizer , these are less . However , in case of nano urea, they have more than 80 percent  
availability to the plant. Now , when sprayed on leaves of plant at critical growth stages, it enters 
through stomata and  other openings and is assimilated by the plants. S o, the most important 
benefit, if  you can literally  spray these nano urea at critical growth stages directly to the crop ; 
and due to its nano size , it can easily enter through the stomata and other opening s, and it can be 
assimilated by the plant cells.  
Now, because of phloem  transport , it is distributed from source to sink inside the plant , wherev er 
it is required. U nutilized nitrogen is stored in the plant vacuole  and is slowly released for proper 
growth and development of the plant. So, this is how IFFCO nano urea  basically works . (Refer Slide Time: 09:46)  
 
Now, nano urea is a sustainable option for farmers towa rds smart a griculture and combat to 
combat the climate change. Generally , it promotes clean a nd green t echnology as it is industrial; 
its industrial production is neither energy intensive or resource consuming . If you remember the 
urea fertilizer  production is the normal urea production is a very energy intensive . However, the 
nano urea production  is less energy consuming. In addition to these , nano urea helps in 
minimizing the environmental footprint by reducing the loss of nutrients from agricultural fields 
in the form of leaching and gaseous emission, which used to cause environmental pollution and 
climate change . 
Now, we know that when there are excess of nitrates that will leach and that will go to different 
water bodies to to basically pollute those water bodies . And also there are chances of gaseous 
emission due to denitrification  process ; and these can be r educed by application of nano urea . (Refer Slide Time: 11:04)  
 
  
Now, how this nano urea basically works? S o, this nano urea which conta ins 4 percent  nanoscale 
nitrogen particles, and they have very small particle size 20 to 50 nanomet er. So, more than also 
they have more surface area and more number  of particles per unit area tha n conventional urea of 
particles . So, they can easily penetrate through  the cell wall or through leave st omata pores . And 
once they can do that  after entering into the plants, they are transported to other plant parts via 
phloem  cells, plasmod esmata which has 14 nanometer 40  nanometer diameter . Or, can bind to 
carrier proteins through aquapori n ion channels and endocytosis.  
So, it can move inside the plant throu gh different components. And therefore, foliar application 
of nano urea liquid results in more efficient nitrogen absorption, better physiological growth , and 
grain production , and better quality of the fruits. Instead of ap plying fertilizer in the soil, i n this 
case of nano urea w e are giving the foliar application with a desired particle size. And these 
particles or nano  particles can easily enter through the stomata ; and they can move through 
phloem and they can be stored in different plant parts to sati sfy the plant requirements . In this 
way, they can ensure the efficient nitrogen absorption or increase nitrogen use efficiency, better 
physiological growth, grain productio n and better quality of fruits.  
So, of course we can see that how use of these nano fertilizer as foliar application can improve 
the fertility , or can im prove the growth of the plants.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:23)  
 
Now, nanoscale particle uptake efficiently due to ultra small size ; because these particle size is  
very small size 20 to 50 na nometer. So, they can be easily absorbed or uptake by the plant . So, 
and released in slow and controlled manner , and translocated through simplest or phloem  
pathways. So, you can see that this picture shows the movement of these nano fertilizer or nano 
urea through different parts of the plant . And then it basically moves from phloem  to different 
things , and thereby stored  there for use of the plant.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:13)  
 Now, what are the benefits from IFFCO nano urea; f irst of all , higher crop yield . So, due to small 
size and more surface area to volume ratio, IFFCO nano urea particles are easily available to 
crops. I have already told you that this fertilizer has higher surface to volume ratio or surface 
area to volume ratio; and thus, they can be e asily available to the crops. Higher  crop yields also 
observed due to enhance chlorophyll and photosynthesis in leaves . Since, these nano fertilizer 
can be sprayed directly onto the leaves , and they can enter into the leaves , and they can store  
there . 
We can see enhance chlorophyll and photosynthesis in leaves , and increase in root biomass and 
number of effective tillers or branches et-cetera . So, we can see direct impact on plant growth by 
the application of nano urea . Average yield increases up to 8 perce nt have been recorded as per 
11,000 field trials conducted across India during 2019 and 20. So , we have , it has been seen that 
8 percent  average increase by the application of nano urea because of this factor ; because they 
can be easily taken by the plant.  They can be easily utilized by the plant and they can ultimately 
enhance the chlorophyll and photosynthesis in the leaves. So, these are the reasons which 
governs the increase in yield in the  crop by using this nano urea.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:58)  
 
And a nother important benefit of using nano urea is it can increase income of the farmers. So, 
IFFCO nano urea  can increase the farmer ’s income; t here are several ways . First of all , reduction 
in input cost ; of course, when we are using 100 kgs of urea , instead  of it we are replacing that by use single bottle of urea. And that can of course reduce the input cost ; and also it gives higher 
crop yields and bette r quality of the crop produce; s o, all of them ultimately helps in in creasing 
the farmer's income.  
So, we  have seen that there is an average increase in income of rupees 2000 per ac re while using 
this nano urea. W e can also see better food quality and crops harvested using IFFCO nano (par) 
IFFCO nano urea are safe for consumption ; and nutritional quality of h arvested produce is better 
in terms of protein and nutrient content. So , these are some of the reasons which are helpful for 
increasing the income for income of the farmers by using this IFFCO nano urea.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:11)  
 
And also reduction in ch emical fertilizer usage . So, nano urea reduces  the application of bulk 
nitrogenous fertilizers like urea . And foliar application of nano urea at critical crop growth stages 
meets nitrogen requirement effectively , we have seen that . So, instead of bulk nitr ogenous 
fertilizers like normal urea fertilizer, we can use this nano  urea fertilizer as foliar application ; and 
that can reduce the chemical fertilizer use and we can directly apply as foliar application . It can 
enhance the use efficiency of one bottle of  nano urea . So, we can see that one bottle of nano urea 
which actually 500 mls that can enhance the use efficiency of nitrogen . 
And then can it can potentially replace at least one bag of conventi onal urea. So, one bag of urea , 
so, around 50 kg of urea bag  can be replaced by only one bottle. So, instead of using 100 kgs of 
urea, we can we can use only 2 bottles of nano urea to cover the same area of the crop . (Refer Slide Time: 18:30)  
 
 
Also  it is very much environmental  friendly ; because agricultural , it is agriculturally sustainable 
and environmentally safe. We can ensure these agricultural sustainability and environmental 
safety by the application of nano urea . And, production of nano urea is energy and resource 
friend ly as we have already mentioned.  It reduces excess application of bulk urea and as stated 
volatilization as well as leaching and runoff losses. It is easy to store and transport ; this  is 
another very important aspect. So, nano urea is required in small quantity as compared to the 
bulky nit rogenous f ertilizers like urea; a nd this has a significant impact in terms of relative 
logistics and warehousing cost.  So, you do no t have to store your, your bags of urea if we are using the Nano urea liquid 
fertilizer ; and farmers can easily carry the bo ttles of nano urea physically into the field. So, you 
can see it can be easily ; so, nano urea is easy to carry and store. And generally the lifecycle is 2 
years from the date of manufacturing. And one bottle is equal to one bag of urea with respect to 
its performance , and crop growth , and development. So, one bottle of 500 ml of urea nano 
fertilizer can replace one bag of urea , which weighs around 45 to 50 kilo.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:00)  
 
Now , certifications . If you  consider the certification IFFCO nano  urea is an approved product 
both nationa lly and internationally. And IFF CO nano urea is in sync with OECD testing 
guidelines and guidelines for testing of nano Agri-inputs and food products by Department of 
Biotechnology , Government of India . Independently , nano urea has been tested and  certified by 
bio-efficacy , biosafety -toxicity and environmental sustainability by environmental suitability , by 
NABL accredited  laboratories . And IFFCO nano  fertilizers meet all the current national and 
international guideline s related to nanotechnology or nanoscale Agri -inputs.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:46)  
 
So, the application of nano urea can be done either using a spring drone or you can do by manual 
spraying. So , first spray  you should do at 30 days after seed germination ; and second spray you 
can do after 2 to 3 weeks after or 1 week  before the flowering.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:08)  
 
Now, safety precautions and general instructions . So, nano urea is non -toxic for the users and 
safe for flora and fauna . But, it is recommended to use face mask and gloves while spraying on 
the crop and store. You should  store it in a dry place, avoiding the high temperature ; and we 
should keep away from the reach of the children and pets.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:38)  
 
Now , there are some general i nstructions. First of all, you have to sha ke the bottle well before 
use; t hen, you have to use the flat fan or cut  nozzles for uniform spraying o n the foliage . And 
then spray during morning or evening hours avoiding the dew.  It is advised to repeat the spr ay, if 
the rains occurs within 12 hours of the nano urea spray.  And nano urea can easily be mixed with 
different bio  stimulants , 100 percent water soluble fertilizer and compatible  agrochemicals . For 
better results,  nano urea should be used within 2 years from  the date of its manufacturing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:18)  
  
Now , you can see using nano urea , it is possible to reduce the conventional urea application  by 
50 percent . So, you can see here we,  people have used 100 percent  urea. And here you can see 50 
percent  less urea plus nano  urea; and both of them are showing almost similar performances. So, 
that shows that using nano urea , we can reduce the traditional bulky urea application . And 
thereby , maintaining the agriculture  sustainability and increasing  the profitability of the farmers.  
So, nano urea can be also used for crops for all crops and for better productivity . So, you can use 
the n ano urea for different crops and  for better productivity.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:06)  
 And ther e is a case study in K VK, Rampura , Rewari;  and it can be seen that when there is there 
are 2 treatment ; treatment 1 is NPK and zinc fertilizer ; and then T2 stands  for 2.5 ton  of compost 
per hectare plus bio fertilizer , plus granular and liquid fertilizer as well as 3 sprays of nano 
nitrogen and zinc. So, when they have applied these in T 2, we can see higher plant growth and 
also higher number of effective tillers per plant , higher yield and higher straw yield. So , all these 
are higher quantity when  nano fertilizer or nano urea w ere applied ; nano urea was applied.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:55)  
 
Now, nano urea has been developed and tested in urea, f irst time in the world ; and tested on 94 
crops at over 11,000 loc ation (inclusi ng) including more than 20 institutes of IC AR or Indian 
Council of A gricultural R esearch , State Agriculture Universities or Krishi Vigyaan Kendras . 
Generally , nano urea inc reases crop productivity by 8 percent b ased on the national average ; and  
there is a reduction in the  use of conventional urea by 50 percent  is possible with the application 
of nano urea . (Refer Slide Time: 24:37)  
 
We know that nano urea requires less to produce more and better . So, if we are using 50 ml of 
IFFCO nano  urea instead of one bag of fertilizer it  is reducing the am ount of fertilizer  being 
used; a nd also it increases the crop productivity. It is environmentally afford  economically 
affordable ; and it is safe and sustainable for food and environment. And it is also non -toxic for 
flora and fauna. So, u ltimately it is a kind of a win -win situation when we are applying th e Nano 
fertilizer in the field.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:14)  
 So, in  a summary we can see that nano urea is a revolutionary product developed by 
nanotechnology , and these provides nitrogen to the crops ; and it is easy to use mix. We can mix 
it with water 2 to 4  ml in 1 liter and spray on the crops ; and tested in 94 crops at our 11,000 
location including more than 20 institutes of IC AR, State Agriculture U niversities , and KVK s. 
The first n ano fertilizer approved by the G overnme nt of India and it is tested on the basis of 
national international guidelines. And it is useful for environmental sustainabi lity and precision 
agriculture.  
So guys, let us wrap up this lecture here . I hope you have you have been exposed to a new 
technolog y of nan o fertilizer, liquid fertilizer.  And please go through the other literature and 
different web resources to learn more about these nano fertilizer s, and how to apply these nano 
fertilizer in the field. We will  discuss the other aspects of fertilizer  and manure  management in 
our last lecture, upcoming lecture of this week; that is lecture number -50. So , we wi ll discuss 
about fe rtigation in our lecture number  50; and let us discuss the fertigation in details in that 
lecture. Thank you . 