Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture 51  
Fertilizer Recommendation Approaches and  Integrated Plant Nutrient Management  
 
Welco me friends  to this week 11 of NPTE L online certification course of Soil Fertility and 
Fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:27)  
 
And in this week, we are going to discuss the fertilizer recommendation approaches and 
integrated plant nutrient management. So, in the fir st lecture of this week, we are going to 
discuss the following concept.  (Refer Slide Time:  0:42)  
 
First of all, we are going to discuss the potential yield  concept and then we are going to 
discuss the variation in yield potential of food and non- food cr ops. Thirdly, we are going to 
discuss the factors affecting crop yield  potential. Fourth, we are going to discuss about 
spectral regions and their influence on plant life. And finally, we are going to discuss effects 
of cropping system and row spacing on production potential. So, these are the concepts you can see in the slide, which we are going to cover in this lecture.  
We are going to start with the definition of the potential yield and how potential yield  is 
important . What are the important aspects of  potential yield and how these potential yield is 
governed by several factors , we are going to discuss ? And then we are going to see the 
spectral region you have already know you already know what is the electromagnetic 
spectrum and what are the different types of components or regions of the electromagnetic 
spectrum.  
So, we are going to see which one of these regions are important for specific plant physiological process . And then we are going to see the cropping system and then how 
manipulation of the cr opping system can help in that protein enhancing the production 
potential .  
 (Refer Slide Time:  2:29)  
 
And these are the keywords like potential yield,  crop environment, solar radiation, soil 
nutrient management and cropping systems. So, these are the ke ywords which we are going 
to discuss in this lecture number 51.  
(Refer Slide Time:  2:44)  
 
So, let us dis cuss the potential yield and it is f ield level  realization .  (Refer Slide Time:  2:51)  
 
Now, before we discuss the potential yield  concept, we should  remember that crop yield is 
the economic part of the plant used for human or animal consumption and measured as grain 
or dry matter quantity per unit l and area. So, if you see that yield formation basically starts 
with the expansion of canopy and root sys tem and then we can see the intersection of solar 
energy with the expansion of canopy and also we can see, the roots  can extract water and also 
extract nutrients.  
So, all these processes like interception of solar energy, interception of water and extract ion 
of water and extraction of nutrients can help in the production of dry matter. A nd ultimately, 
the production of dry matter  can help in the allocation to the yield. So, this is how crop yield 
basically is  governed.  (Refer Slide Time:  4:16)  
 
Now, if we see the growth of a crop of course, it starts with the germination and then it goes 
to initiation of new primordia. And then, we can see the development of leaves and roots, leaves and roots expands and form the canopy. And of course, we can see as we have seen in 
our last slide, this canopy helps interception of solar radiation and the root system helps in the 
extraction of water and nutrient . And ultimately also there is a third component called 
flowers. So, all these interception of solar radiation extraction of water nutrient and dry matter can create the dry matter and finally, the yield. So, this is an important flowchart that 
shows the growth of a crop and ultimately to produce the yield.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 5:12)  
 Now, what is potential yield ? So, potentially is an estimate of the upper limit of the crop 
yield. Now, it is the most optimistic estimate of crop yield based on present knowledge and 
available biological material under ideal management in an optimum physical environment, 
so, these are v ery important under ideal management in an optimum physical environment. 
Why we are highlighting these under ideal management and optimal physica l environment 
we will see when we wi ll compare the potential yield with attainable yield and actually level.  
So, right now, you should remember that potential yield is an estimate of the upper limit of 
the crop yield and it is the most optimistic estimate of crop yield based on the present knowledge and available biological materials under ideal management in an o ptimum 
physical environment.  
Now, yield potential may be the maximum yield obtained by the best genotype available in a 
specific agro climatic environment when the known biotic and abiotic constants are overcome. So, here we are not considering the biotic  and abiotic constraints, when we will  
consider these biotic and abiotic constraints will  move to other yield levels like attainable 
yield as well as actual yield, which we will  discuss in our next lecture. But in this lecture, we 
can see this is the most optimistic estimate of the crop yield.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 6:47)  
 
Now, the yield potential of the crop can be expres sed to the following physiological models. 
So, yield  potential can be considered as a where C is  the mean growth rate, DR stands for the 
duration of reproductive growth and P stands for the mean fraction of C that is the mean fraction of this mean growth rate partition towards the reproductive organs. So, this is how 
we can calculate the yield potential .  
(Refer Slide Time:  7:28)  
 
Now, if you s ee the last 15 years of minimum, maximum and variation in yield potential of 
food and non- food crops in  Gujarat state of India, we can see that the minimum yield and 
maximum yield  are quite variable according to different seasons and as per different cr ops 
also you can see in case of g roundnut when it is a kharif  crop, we will  see the 2,536  percent  
of variation in the yield  however, in summer there is only 95 percent  variation.  
In case of wheat , we can see 65  percent  variation , in pearl millet we can see 441 percent  
variation , in case of  cotton, we can see 901 percent  variation , in case of  sugarcane 38  percent  
variation , in case of gram 454  percent  variation , in case of castor 222  percent  variation , in 
case of onion 47 percent  variation , in case of garli c 103 percent  variation , in case of cesium 
1231 percent  variation , in case of  cumin  is only 85  percent  variation. So, you can see the 
person variation in yield  varies from one crop to crop and also within a  crop based on the 
season also.  (Refer Slide Time:  8:51)  
 
So, what are the factors which affect the crop yield potential. Now, the crop yield potential 
are dependent on four major factors that is climate, plants , soil, management. S o, not only the 
climatic factors, but also plant factors , soil factors and management factors are important for 
maintaining the crop yield potential.  
(Refer Slide Time:  9:28)  
 
Now, what are the factors affecting crop yield potential ? So, mathematically, the crop yield 
potential can be expressed by the following equation like Y  equal to function of E , P, M, S  
where Y  is the yield  potential , E stands for the environment , P stands for the plant factors, M 
stands for the managing factors and S stands for the socio- economic factors. So, what are the 
environmental factors ? So, it includes both climat ic and soil climatic factors or soil environment. W hat are the climatic factors ? Temperature, solar radiation, moisture supply, 
these are important climatic factors.  
Among the soil factors , we can see physical factors like texture, str ucture, consistency, 
porosity, density,  tilth. T hese are important soil factors, physical factors. Wha t are the soil 
chemical factors? We can see nutrient content pH, salinity, alkalinity, so, these are important 
nutrient chemical soil chemical factors . Among the soil biological factors , we can see 
symbiot ic nitrogen fixation, Mycorrhizae . So, these are soil biological factors . Among the 
plant factors we can see genetic variability then photosynthetic efficiency then plant 
architecture,  harvest index , plant  density, these are important plant factors .  
And among the socio- economic factors , we can see marketing factor , price factor , extension 
service factor and availability of the credit factors are important for determining the crop 
yield potential.  
(Refer S lide Time:  11:05)  
 
So, if you see the ground production potential it depends on several factors like rainfall, soils, 
average yield and so on. So, ultimately the yield potential when there is a 5100 kg per hectare 
rainfall, accounts for the majority followed by soil.  (Refer Slide Time:  11:24)  
 
Now, if we focus on the environmental factors, so, the crop environment is composed of 
climate and soil factors, which exert a great influence on plant growth and consequently yield . We have already seen that depending on the kharif or summer, the groundnut  
production yield  there  is a groundnut  yield  shows a wide variation in Gujarat in our previous 
slides we have seen . So, climatic factors such as temperature, solar radiation and moisture 
supply play an important role in crop production.  
Similarly, soils , physical , chemical and biological properties directly related to crop yield 
potential . so, these are environmental factors.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 12:11)  
 Now, climatic factors among the various factors the climate  is the most dominating factor 
influencing the stability of the crop in a particular region. Now, the yield potential of a crop 
mainly depends on climate more than 50 percent  of the variation in yield of a crop is due to 
climatic differences we have seen. So, the most important climatic factors influencing crops grow up influencing the crop yield crops growth development are basically the temperature , 
rainfall and solar radiation.  
So, temperature rainfall and solar radiation are the most important climatic  factors that 
influence crop growth, development and ultimately their yield.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 12:57)  
 
So, if we see these graph it can be it shows the relationship between the rice grain yield and 
canopy temperature at 50  percent  flowering, we can see that as the canopy temperature 
increases, there is a gradual decline in grain yield per square meter. So, that shows that 
increase in the canopy temperature has a deleterious or inverse effect in the grain yield.  (Refer Slide Time:  13:29)  
 
So, another i mportant factor is the solar radiation. So, solar e nergy provides light which is 
required for seed germination and the leaf expectation, then growth of stem  and short -flower 
growth stem and short and then flowering and fruiting and then thermal conditions which are 
necessary for the physiological functions of the plant. Now, the effect of solar radiation on 
plant communities can be divided into four categories that is thermal effect of radiation, the photosynthetic effect of radiation and the photoperiodic  effect and the other effects of 
radiation. Now, solar radiation affects photosynthesis and consequently crop production also.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 14:16)  
 So, if you see this relationship between interceptive radiation and then yield  you can see there 
is a positive relationship between the yield of this barely  as a function of intercepted radiation 
at the grain f illing stage.  
(Refer Slide Time:  14:36)  
 
So, a portion of the solar radiation up to 28  percent  in energy is used in photosynthesis . More 
than 70 percent  of the solar radiation absorbed by the plant is converted is basically converted 
into heat. So, this heat energy is used for transportation and convective heat exchange with 
the surrounding. So, these exchanges determined the temperature of the leaves and other 
plant parts . Remember that solar radiation also influences the assimilation of nutrients , dry 
matter distribution etc.  
So, not only that the solar radiation is useful for determining the temperature of the leaves 
and other plant parts, but a lso it influences the assimilation of the nutrients and dry matter 
distribution and when there will  be dry matter accumulation distribution that will  cause the 
yield .  (Refer Slide Time:  15:41)  
 
Now, if we see the spectral regions and their influence on plant life, we will  see that 
ultraviolet radiation which is an important component of electromagnetic radiation, which is 
spectral region of 0.3 to 0.4 micrometer which is having 0 to 4 percent  of the solar energy has 
moderate impact on photoperiodism of the plant, however, that have no significant impact in photosynthetic activities or thermal activities .  
Now, photosynthetic active radiation or P AR, which has a spectral region of 0.4 to 0.7 
micrometer, which accounts for 20 to 46 percent  of the solar ener gy has a significant impact 
on thermal  process, photosynthetic process and photoperiodic  process of plant . In case of 
near infrared radiation which varies from 0.7 to 4 micrometer, which accounts for 50 to 80  
percent  of the solar energy can has the signifi cant impact on thermal as well as photoperiodic  
properties of the plant . However, they have no significant impact on photosynthesis.  
However, in case of l ongwell radiation, which varies from 4 to 00 m illimeter, they have 
significant impact on thermal properties o r photoperiodic  properties however, they have non-
significant impact in photosynthetic properties of the plant. So, these are the important 
concepts the important influences of solar radiation on the plant growth and ultimately on 
plant yield.  (Refer Slide Time:  17:39)  
 
Now, moisture supply also is one of the most important factors determining crop production 
potential. Now, we know that water is required  by the plants for the translocation of mineral 
elements for the manufacture of carbohydrates  and the maintenance of the hydration of the 
protoplasm.  
Now, crop yield  potential can be reduced at very low and very high moisture levels. So, both 
these extremes are not good for plant growth and excess moisture reduces soil aeration and the supply of oxygen available to root. So, that also creates negative impact for the plant growth.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 18:19)  
 So, if we see the relationship between cabbage head yield and irrigation water, where these 
error bars are showing the standard error mean we  can see there is a positive relationship 
between irrigation water availability and head yield . So, that shows the impact of water 
availability for the ultimate yield of the crop.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:42)  
 
What are the importance of soil factors ? Now, s oil physical , biological and chemical 
properties directly or indirectly affect plant root growth, absorption of water and nutrients and consequently plant growth and yield potential . We know that soil physical properties play an 
important role in the growt h and development of the plants. So, the important soil physical 
properties which affect plant growth and textures  are basically the soil texture, soil structure , 
soil consistency, soil pore space,  soil density , soil tilth  and soil colou r.  
So, a plant mus t have a good soil structure specifically either gram or granular soil structure 
for their better  growth . They should have favorable soil texture so, that there should be good 
aeration and water movement . They should have optimum pore space which can help in 
water holding capacity as well as water and  air movement. They should have good soil t ilth 
whose  physical condition after tillage . So, all these and they should ha ve also the lower bulk 
density and this lower bulk density we can achieve by different met hods, one of them is 
application of soil organic matter. So, the soil factors are very important for the growth of the plant or the yield of the plant.  
Now, among all soil factors , soil nutrient management is the most crucial factor aff ecting the  
crops pr oduction potential. So, how bait how we can manage the soil nutrient can determine the crops production potential . Judicious application and better management of fertilizers to 
the crop both chemical fertilizer as well as manual when we apply that will  govern the growth 
and yield of the crops. So, soil factors both physical , chemical and biological factors are very 
much important for the growth and yield of the crops.  
(Refer Slide Time:  21:07)  
 
So, if we see the effect of organic manures  and inorganic fer tilizers or  yield  potential of 
wheat  under rice wheat  system you can see that there are different treatment where there is no 
organic matter s esbania then biogas , rice straw . We can see when we are using the biogas 
slurry  Dwived and Thakur  has shown that w ith the use of biogas slurry, there is an incr ease in 
the grain yield in 1995- 96. And in the 1996 97 season, we can also see there is an increase in 
the grain yield.  
If we see the residual fertility, when we apply these fertilizer 100 60 40 we can see als o there 
will be higher grain yield and also higher in both the seasons, the highest gain in both the 
season we can see. A nd also the different types of fertil ity levels whe n you use like 120 60 40 
we can get the highest grain yield in both the seasons. So,  that shows the effect of organic 
manure and inorganic fertilizer on yield  potential of the crop.  (Refer Slide Time:  22:28)  
 
Now, if we also see the influence of FYM  in fertilizer on yield  potential of rice, we can see 
that when we are giving 10 ton  per hectare  FYM  in the field that can increase the grain yield  
to 43.512 quintal per hectare. And when we a re applying fertilizer dose in different ratio, 
when we are applying at 120 60 40 that is giving us the highest yield.  
(Refer Slide Time:  22:57)  
 
Also  in this table, we can see the yield  potential of wheat as influenced by biofertilizer a nd 
nitrogen level we can see when we are applying the combination of A zospirillum and 
Azotobacto r by fertilizers together, they are giving the highest grain yield of 44 .3 quintal  per 
hectare and also they are giving the highest yield of  72.8 quintal  per hectare . When you a re applying the 120 kg of nitrogen per hectare, that also gives us the highest production for both 
yield and straw.  
(Refer Slide Time:  23:43)  
 
So, le t us now discuss what are the important plant factors. So,  plant factors such as genetic 
variability, photosynthetic efficiency, plant architecture, cropping system, crop rotation, 
harvest index, plant density et  cetera are also important in production pot ential of different 
crops.  
(Refer Slide Time:  24:05)  
 
So, if you see the yield potent ial of sole  crop as influenced by intercropping system, so, here 
we can use several sole  crop like groundnut , pigeonpea , maize  but when we are using these intercropping using for by combining groundnut and pigeonpea  we can see that we are 
getting the highes t ground nut pod yield in as 11. 82 quintile per hectare. And also we can see 
in case of intercropping we are getting the highest seed yield  also 4.59 quintal per hectar e. 
Also when we mix the groundnut and maize in an entire cr opping we can see the highest pod 
yield  we can see at this ratio and also, we can also see the yield highest crop seed yield  when 
we are having the ratio of 3 is  to 2.  
So, that shows that when we are intercropping some of the crops in the existing crop that has 
the capability of enhancing the yield and that can be attributed to several factors . First of all, 
when we are adding or when we are introducing these crops like pigeonpea  let us  say this 
pigeonpea  is a leguminous crop and when we are adding a legume in the as an intercropping 
that can also add not only the nitrogen to biological nitrogen fixation, but also that can add the organic matter into the field that can enhance the soil fertility and  as a result that can also 
improve the yield of the crop. So, that is why intercropping can help in the yield of the crop.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 26:11)  
 
We can also see effective cropping system and row spacing on production potential of 
sugarcane, you can see here when we are using different cropping system like sugarcane 
lentils,  sugarcane mustard , sugar cane maize, sugarcane rajmash and then sugar cane rapeseed . 
We can see when we add when we are using the sugarcane mage cropping system and also 
sugarcane sole cropping system. So, we are also getting very good bouquet yield  we are 
getting, but when we are using also the row spacing you can see from 75 to 90 we are getting the 127 ton  per hectare of cane yield.  So, although sugar we are using sugar cane as a sole crop we are getting 131.5 tonnes per 
hectare when we are adding different types of crop in the cropping system . In this example, 
we are not getting any significant higher or higher crop cane yield . However, the row spacing 
change can has  influence on the cane yield. So, that shows how we select a crop, whether we 
go grow it in as a sole crop or whether we can grow in a that crop in a cropping system 
determines the yield sometime and also row spacing has an influence on the crop yield  also.  
(Refer Slid e Time:  27:50)  
 
So, to summarize this lecture, we can see that there are several influential factors of  potential 
yield of a crop and we should be very very careful while selecting those factors while 
considering those factors and so, that because those f actors can influence the crop yield and 
basically a better combination of those factors needs to be selected. So, that we can ensure that we have optimum cropping .  
First of all, we need to ensure that there are proper land preparations , also adequate and 
balanced fertilizers this very important and adequate balance fertilization, we have already 
discussed which is a combination of both chemical fertilizer as well as organic manure. We 
should use the good quality seed. W e should saw  the cultivar  of higher production potential. 
We should use adequate plant density and spacing as  we have seen in our last slide. We 
should control the disease insects and weeds so that there is no harmful impact on yield 
potential .  
We should supply the adequate water and also we  should use the drought resistant cultivars . 
We should use the proper crop rotation and we should always maintain the soil organic matter . In highly developed agriculture, large increase in yield potential will mostly come 
from interaction effects and farm ers must be ready to taste all new advances that may raise 
yield  potential of their crops and be prepared to try combination of two or more practices. So,  
these are the summary of this is basically the summary of this whole lecture number 51.  
(Refer Slide  Time:  29:59)  
 
 
I hope that you have got some good knowledge and important knowledge and you have 
gotten more insight on  plant yield and potential yield concept. So, these are the references 
which I have used for this lecture and ple ase go through these different references and 
sources to see effects of different factors on plant yield  potential. And if you have any 
difficulties, please let me know, in our forum. And also you can ask me this question in our 
live introduction session also.  And I will  be m ore than happy to answer your  queries. Thank you very much.  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:50)  
 
 
 