Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture – 50 
Biofertilizers and Management of Fertilizers and Manures in Soil (Contd.)  
Welcome friends to this 50th lecture of NPTEL  online certification course of soil fertility and 
fertilizers. And in this lecture, we are basically right now at week 10, where we are discussing 
biofertilizers and management of fertilizers and manures.  And in this lecture w e are going to 
discuss the topic of fertigation. Now, in our previous couple of lectures we have discussed ab out 
we have discussed about bio fertilizers, how we can develop bio fertilizers, how we can what are 
characteristics of bio fertilizers . And also we h ave discussed what are the benefits of using bio 
fertilizers ? In the second lecture , we have discussed about biocha ; why it is important fo r 
enhancing the soil fertility.  
In the third lecture , we have discussed about mulching and why mulching is important ; and what 
are the different types of mulching like organic mulching , inorganic mulching we have discussed 
in details. In the fourth lecture we have discussed about nano urea , which is an important 
addition in the fertilizer market ; and which can improve th e nitrogen use efficient by the crop. 
So, we have dis cussed all these 4 topics so  far in this week. Now, in the last lecture of this week, 
that is 50th lecture we are going to discuss the fertigation . 
(Refer  Slide Time: 02:00 ) 
  
 
Now, these are the con cepts which we are going to cover in this lecture. First of all, what is 
fertigation ? Then, why fertigation is necessary ? Then, what are the different types of fertigation ? 
And then, effect of drip irrigation on yield , water use efficiency and economics ; and also we are 
going to discuss the benefits of fertigation. So, these are some major concepts, which we are 
going to discuss in this lecture. These are  some of the keywords which you a re going to use in 
this lecture fertigation , drip irrigation,  fertilize r tank , water productivity , and water use 
efficiency.  
So, to begin this lecture we should remember that fertigation is a way for sustainable nutrient, 
water and crop management , where there is a water scarcity , where there is nutrient reduced nutrient use efficiency . We can use fertigation to improve both the nutrient use effic iency and 
water use efficiency.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:12)  
 
Now, let us discuss what is fertigation ? So, fertigation is a technique in agricultural water 
management that supplies diss olved fertilizers to your crop through an irrigation system ; that is 
feeding a crop by injecting soluble fertilizers into the water and transporting them into the active 
roots zone. S o, here one thing is very important as you can see, that is soluble ferti lizers. So, this 
fertigation system always deals with these soluble fertilizers into  and basically this fertigation 
system feed the crop by injecting the soluble fertilizers into the water , and transporting them into 
the active root zone , so that the y can be up taken by the plant.  
Now, remember that fertigation effectively controls the timing, rate and application of fertilizer 
as per crop physiological demands. So, essentially using fertigation , we can give the fertilizer as 
well as irrigation  application at proper time, proper rate and  so proper method of application as 
per the crop physiological demands . First  scientific approaches to fertigation started in 1958 in 
the USA using sprinkler irrigation;  so we are going to discuss this sprinkler irrigation la ter on in 
this lecture. But , remember that the first application of this fertigatio n started in the United 
States.  
So, if we go back and if we just move ahead and see the next important topic or important aspect 
that is why fertigation is necessary.  (Refe r Slide Time: 05:28)  
 
Now, this is a picture of a fertigation ; you can see the fertigation is being applied to the plant in 
the field. Now , why fertigation is necessary?  So, the incessant population pressure generally 
brings down per capita water availabi lity by 41 percent in  Indian condition of course, where the 
irrigation sectors consume the lion's share ; that is 83 percent  of the present  water utilization. So, 
you can see that although there is high percentage of the present wate r utilization is account ed 
for irrigation s ector, the per capita water availabil ity is continuously decreasing.  
Now, India is fast approaching a water scarce country and decreasing per capita water 
availability in India. So, the consumption , at the same time  the consumption of fe rtilizer namely 
Urea,  DAP , MO P, NPK complex , and SSP increase d from 1991 to 1992 to 2014 to 15 , by 118 to  
68, and 67 , 157  and 26 percent  for all these fertilizers in just 23 years. So, you can see the 
fertilizer consumption has drastically increased . But, at the same time the the  the water 
availability per capita water availability has been decreasing since long time ; and we are quickly 
approaching it to a water scarce condition.  (Refer Slide Time: 07:30)  
 
Now, if we see the scenario of per capita water a vailability in India, we wi ll see that starting 
from 1951 where our per capita water availability was quite high. There is a gradual decline in 
per capita water availability ; and you can see by 2050 we will basically reach towards these red 
line or thresho ld of water scarcity . Right now, in this zone we belong to this zone  that is 
somewhere in between water stress level and water scarcity. However, we are fast approaching 
towards water scarcity, and by 2050 we will  be reaching to wards water scarcity thresho ld. 
So, by applying this fertigation that is application of fertilizer with irrigation , we can maximize 
the profit by applying the right a mount of water and fertilizer; s o, this is the most important 
thing. The second is we can minimize the adverse environ mental effects by reducing the leaching 
of fertilizer and other chemicals below the root  zone . So, now we know that several fertilizers are 
very much susceptible to leaching losses , specifically nitrogenous fertilizers. So , if we apply 
these fertilizer  in the judicious rate, according to the crop physiological demand through 
fertigation, we can reduce the fertilizer application ; and also we can ensure that there will be no 
leaching of fertilizer materials.  So, these are some  of the impacts of fertigation.  (Refer Slide Time: 09:16)  
 
Now, if we see what are the different types of fertigation ? First of all, there is surface fertigation. 
Then, we can see , first of all , we can see surface fertigation ; then, we can see also furrow  
fertigation , and third category  is micro -fertigation. Now, the micro -fertigation can be also 
divided into 2 category ; one is sprinkler irrigation , another  is drip irrigation. Now , in this lecture 
we are going to first discuss the drip irrigation or drip fertigation , then we wi ll discuss  the 
sprinkler irrigation. So, le t us go ahead and see the micro -fertigation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:11)  
 Now, m icro fertigation  has gained attention over other fertigation methods. Now, what is micro 
fertigation ? Micro fertigation is a modern fertilizer a pplication method through an irrigation 
system with high frequency water application in and around the plant ’s root zone. So, both these 
drip irrigation and spr inkler irrigation comes under there, come under the category of these micro 
fertigation . And in the micro fertigation method, we are ensuri ng that we are applying the  
irrigation water in high frequency in and around the plant ’s root zone . And this method of micro 
fertigation irrigates water containing nutrients through  drippers, sprinklers foggers et-cetera.  
We are going  to see on the surface or subsurface of the land. Based on the requirement , we can 
apply the fertilizer as well as irrigation at proper place. The second important thing with,  I mean 
the first category of micro  fertigation  or is drip fertigation and drip fertigation mostly followed in 
the commercial cultivation of crops. So , all the commercially cultivated crops they are suitable 
for drip irrigation. Now, it is a system of crop fertigation involving the control led delivery of 
water dire ctly to individual plants through a network of tubes and pipes. So , in this drip irrigation 
using a network of tubes and pipes  we can apply the fertilizer in a controlled way.  
And drip fertigation started in Israel in tomato crop and drip fertigation save 30 percent  of the 
applied fertilizer. So, drip fertigation is known to save 30 percent  of the applied  fertilizers. So , 
this is the benefit of deferred drip fertigation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:32)  
  
Now, so let us discuss what are the equipments which are  used in drip fertigation ? So, the first 
one is V enturi or (Ventu) v, e, n, t, u, r, i or v, e, n, t, u, r, y ; both of them are correct , so you can 
use either of them. So Venturi  is a device which creates a vacuum when fluids flows through it. 
So, the flui d which flows through it , creates a vacuum  is known as the motive fluid; a nd in 
motive  fluid is basically the irrigation water itself. So , when the irrigation water creates a 
vacuum that sucks the fertilizer or chemical into the motive water ; and ultimatel y that gives that 
fertilizer mix water to the plant. Second important component is a fertilizer tank. So , it is a tank 
containing fertilizer solution which is connected to the irrigation pipe at th e supply point.  
Now , part of the irrigation water is divert ed through the tank diluting the nutrient solution , and 
returning to the main supply pipe . And the concentration of fertilizer in the tank thus becomes 
gradually reduced. The third important component  is fertilizer pump. So, the fertilizer pump is a 
standa rd component of the control head. Now , the fer tilizer solution is held in non -pressurized 
tank and it can be injected into the irrigation water at any desired ratio. Therefore, the fertilizer 
availability to each plant is maintained properly. So , these are  different equipments which are 
being used drip fertigation . You can see this Venturi;  this is a  fertilizer tank and this is a  fertilizer 
pump.  (Refer Slide Time: 14:13)  
 
Now, this is an example of drip irrigation. And you can see the drip irrigation can  give or supply 
the fertilizer mixed water , irrigation water to the exact plant root zone . And thereby , supplying 
the required  quantity of the fertilizer as well as water without wasting ; and thereby increasing the 
water use efficiency or the nutrient use efficiency.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:42)  
 
The second type of micro fertigation is can be mediated through sprinkler irrigation. Now , what 
is sprinkler irrigation ? Sprinkler irrigation is a method of applying irrigation water which is 
similar to natural rainf all. Now , you can see this is an picture or image of sprinkler irrigation. So, in this sprinkler irrigation water is distributed through a system of pipes usually by pumping. 
Now , it is then sprayed into air through sprinklers , so that it breaks  up into th e into small water 
droplets which fall on the ground.  
Now, the pump supply system sprinklers and operating condition must be designed to enable a 
uniform application of water. So , this is a sprinkler irrigation system ; and we can apply the 
fertilizer to sp rinkler irrigation  also. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:49)  
 
Now , let us see what are the crops which is suited for fertigation . If we see the field crops , we 
can see aerobic  rice, wheat , maize , cotton pulses are very suitable for fertigation . In case of 
vegetable s tomato , chilly,  capsicum, cabbage, cauliflower , onion, okra, brinjal,  bottle gourd , 
cucumber these are suitable for fertigation . Or, in the orchard crops , we can see grape , banana , 
pomegranate, orange , citrus,  tamarind , mango , fig, lemon , custard apples , suppota,  guava , 
pineapple, coconut , cashew nut , papaya et-cetera ; these are suited for fertigation . In case of 
flowers rose , carnation , gerbera, jasmine,  marigold these are suited for fertigation . 
In case of plantation crop tea , rubber,  coffee , coconut ar e important for fertigation . In case of 
spices turmeric, cloves, mint are important for fertigation . In case of oil seeds, sunflower , oil 
palm , and groundnut can be irrigated by fertigation. And in case of forest crops teakwood,  
bamboo can be can be mainta ined or managed by fertigation. So , these are the crops which are 
suited for fertigation.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:05)  
 
Now, let us see what are the sources of the fertilizers ? Now, as I have mentioned that one of the 
major criteria of fertigation is the us e of water soluble fertilizer . So, most water soluble and 
liquid fertilizers are suitable for fertigation . What are those water soluble fertilizers? So , we can 
see that ammonium among  nitrogenous fertilizer , we can see ammonium nitrate , ammonium 
sulfate , urea, and combination of nitrate and amine which is known as easy nitrogen or easy N  
can be also utilized in fertigation. In case of phosphorus fertilizer, phosphoric acid , mono -
ammonium phosphate , di-ammonium phosphate;  so, these are important soluble fert ilizers which 
you can use for fertigation method.  
The third most importa nt primary nutrient is potassic  fertilizer . And in case of potassic fertilizer, 
potassium nitrate , potassium chloride , and potassium sulfate are water soluble and liquid 
fertilizer , which is suitable for fertigation. So, these are different types of soluble fertilizers 
which you can apply as we can apply for fertigation.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:27)  
 
Now, what are the factors which can control the selection of fertilizer for fertigation ? So, the 
major factors are basically plant type, then soil conditions , water quality , and fertilizer 
competition price. So, these 4 to 5 factors are the controlling or determining factors for selecting 
the fertilizers for fertigation method. Now, what are the properties of nutrients which are 
important for selection of the fertilizer ? First of all, form ; this is the most important property . 
Whether that form is a soluble form or liquid form ; these these are important factors for selecting 
the fertilizer . 
Secondly, whether they have high solubility or low solubility that is also an important 
consideration when we select the fertilizer for fertigation . And also interaction between 
fertilizers in solution ; there should have complete compatibility . Otherwise , there will be we 
cannot use that fertilizer for fertigation ; and fourth  important point is corrosivity. So, it should 
have minimum chemical reactions to to interact with the materials which are pres ent in the 
fertigation system; s o, that there should not be any salt buildup or the re should not be any 
corrosion.  
So, these are important factors which are which are one should remember before selecting the 
proper fertilizer , before the fertigation purpose.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:23)  
 
Now, if we see the soluble f ertilizers used in fertigation , we can see am monium nitrate which 
contain 34 percent  nitrogen ; and has a solubility of 18 hundred 30 gram per l iter at 20 degrees 
centigrade. A mmonium sulfate has 21 percent  nitrogen and it has a solubility of 760 . Urea has 46 
percent nitrogen and  1100 gram per liter solubility; m onoammonium phosphate 12-61-0 and 282 . 
And you can see for other fertilizers also like diammonium phosphate , we can see it has 18 
percent  nitrogen and 46 percent  P2O5; and it has 575 gr am per lit er solubility.  
So, it is , this is a list of the fertilizers  which can show there ; and also which are suitable for 
fertigation and we can see their responding solubility also.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:23)  
 
Now, if you see the compatibility chart of different wat er soluble fertilizers . So, we can see that 
urea is compatible with ammonium nitrate, ammonium sulpha te, calcium nitrate , and then 
mono ammonium phosphate , mono potassium phosphate , and potassium nitrate. However, the 
calcium nitrate he has no compatibility  with mono ammonium phosphate and mono potassium 
phosphate. Similarly, mono ammonium phosphate has no compared not compatible with calcium 
nitrate ; and mono potassium phosphate is not compatible with calcium nitrate . 
And limited compatibility we can see betw een ca lcium nitrate and ammonium sulpha te, and also 
calcium nitrate and ammonium sulpha te. So, this table helps us to see whether we have, I mean 
what should be the ideal combination of different soluble fertilizers which we use for fertigation 
purpose.  (Refer Slide Time: 22:32)  
 
Now, if we want to see the comparative  fertilizer use efficiency ; in case of nitrogen , in case of 
soil application, the fertilizer use efficiency varies from 30 to 50 percent . However, in case of 
fertigation , we get 95 percent  water fertilizer use efficiency . In case of phosphorus , we get 20 
percent  for soil application.  In case of fertigation , we get 45 percent  for soil application. In case 
of potassium , we get 50 percent  for soil application ; however , in case of fertigation , we get 80 
percent for fertigation. Now, water saving , yield and profit under  drip and drip irrigation 
fertigation system s; so you can see in case of banana , water saving 35 percent.  And in case of 
conventional that should be the yield will be around 20 ton  per hectare ; whereas , in case of drip 
the yield  will increase . 
And in case of sugar cane and tomato  also, y ou can s ee the water savings will be 29 percent, 32 
percent ; in all th e cases there will be increase in  the yield. And if you see the profit, the  drip p lus 
fertigation will give you profit for all the 3 conditions. And so this is the p rofit chart which you 
can see o r compare . So, in case of conventional , it is 81000 ; and 98000 , in cas e of drip.  But, 
when you combine  both drip  and fertigation , you will get  120000.  In case of banana : in case of 
sugarcane will get 68,000 ; in case of tomato , you will get 95,000  when combining drip 
fertigation . 
So, these are different types of water saving yield and profit under  drip and drip fertigation 
systems.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:20)  
 
Now , if you see the cost of fertigation  equipments , we have already discuss.  So, the Venturi type 
is around 1200 . In case of fertilizer tank , it is 3000 ; in case of injectors,  these are 12,000. So , the 
initial investment in drip irrigation s ystem is mainly depends upon the spacing of the crop s. So, 
the initi al cost will be almost 20 to 25 thousand  rupees per hectare for wider spacing crops such 
as coconut , mang o, grapes and for orchard crops.  And the initial co st is approximately 50 to 70 
thousand  rupees per hectare for cl ose spacing crops such as sugar cane, banana, papaya, 
mulberry, turmeric, tapioca , vegetables and flower crops.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:10)  
 So, if you see the effect of the fertigation on yield , and water use efficiency and e conomics of 
Banana, you can clearly see that when there are different treatments ; so D2F2  stands for D 2F2 
stands for the drip irrigation with at 0.8; it is 0 and F2  stands for the 80 percent of the 
recommended for dose of  fertilizer. So , in this combination , we can see that marketable fruit 
yield is increasing among all the treatments. So , the marketable yield is highest in this treatment 
and also irrigation water. If you see it is 318 millimeter , and crop water use you can see also it is 
quite high . 
And als o water use efficiency if we compare , these can show the highest water use efficiency of 
60 around 60 kg per hectare 1 millimeter. So, this water use efficiency is 60 kg per hectare 
millimeter. And you can see also net returns is also increasing. So , you c an see this is an example 
of effect of drip fertigation on yield  water use efficiency and economics of Banana.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:33)  
 
Also if you see the response of different crops under fertigation , we can see that saving in 
fertilizer for different  crops , we can see from which varies from 20 to 60  percent ; so, 20 percent  
in cotton and 60 percent  in castor . And also we can see the yield increase percent  yield  increase 
varying from 11 to around 40  percent . So, that shows that use of fertigation can no t only save the 
fertilizer , but also simultaneo usly it can increase the yield.  (Refer Slide Time: 27:05)  
 
Also if you see the effect of drip irrigation on nutrient dynamics, water productivity and partial 
factor productivity , we can see these F 2 treatmen t which is basically 50  percent  of nitrogen and 
potash ; and also plus 50  percent  of phosphate in soil . We can see the soil nitrogen status after 
harvest, actual gain of nitrogen , and soil phosphorus status after harvest, actual gain of phosphate 
or phospho rus; and then soil potassium status after harvest . And also,  the partial  factor 
productiv ity is highest in case of this F 2 treatment. So , that shows the importance of the 
fertigation for a drip irrigation on fertilizer u se efficiency by different crops.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:58)  
 Also, if we see the effect of fertigation on nitrous oxide emission and nitrate leaching from a 
greenhouse study on tomato , published by Zhao et al  2021 . We can see that when there is a 
combination of drip irrigati on with reduced fertilization, or drip  fertilization in other words  and 
drip irrigation or drip fertigation with maize straw , there is significant decrease in nitrous oxide 
emission. Simultaneously , we can see that there are reduction in nitrate leaching when we us e the 
drip fertigation process.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:38)  
 
So, what are the benefits of fertigation ? So, a frequent supply of nutrients uses fluctuation of 
nutrient concentration in soil ; and then efficient utilization and precise application of nutrients 
accord ing to the nutritional requirement of the crop. Fertilizers are applied throughout the 
irrigated soil volume ; and the nutrients can be applied to the soil when soil or crop condition 
would otherwise prohibit  the entry of field , entry into the field with co nventional equipment . 
And then it also increases water and nutrient  use efficiencies and crop productivity ; and also 
finally it hel ps in weed management.  (Refer Slide Time: 29:16)  
 
However, at the same time, there are several disadvantages of fertigation  methods also. For 
example, high cost of involvement  for setting up the fertigation system. And if the pH of 
irrigation water fertilizer sources are high, then there is chances of clogging of the emitters . 
There are certain salts like  bicarbonates and inso luble di calcium phosphate , magnesium 
phosphates, which can precipitate ; and clog the fertigation system that could be salt injury due to 
evaporation of anions and accumulation of cations  like sodium and calcium. Which can hinders 
the benefits accruing  from  fertigation ; and there are it requires technical skills and expertise for 
handling the fertigation system.  
It is less popular in close grain crops like rice, wheat et-cetera . And then also high cost and local 
unavailability of the liquid fertilizers are a lso important disadvantages for fertigation methods . (Refer Slide Time: 30:1 2) 
 
 
So, to summarize  this fertigation , fertigation helps in proper utilization of water and fertilizers 
over conventional method of irrigation ; hence increases the productivity  of the crops. And then 
fertigation applied through micro -irrigation system is undoubtedly one of the most effective 
strategies to improve water and nutrient use efficiency in agricultural systems. The possibility of 
supplying water and nutrient at precise  manner improves plant water and nutrient uptake and 
their availability into the root zone . Among different methods of fertigation , drip fertigation is 
mainly  used in the agriculture field.  And this seems beneficial among other methods to optimize the reso urce use efficiency by 
enhancing the uptake of nutrient , and reducing the leaching loss of nutrient and water uses.  And 
besides enhancin g the resource use efficiency, i t also provides economic return by reducing the 
wastage of nutrient and water . And all t hese positively influence the economic and 
environmental sustainabil ity of agricultural activities.  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:16)  
 
 
So guys, by this we have wrapped up this this lecture ; and these are the references which I have 
used. So , please go through t hese references for getting more knowledge on fertigation . And if you have any questions, please let me know so that I can answer your queries. Let us meet in our 
next week of lectures to discuss other aspects of soil fertility and fertilizers. Thank you . 