Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 52 
Fertilizer Recommendation Approaches and Integrated Plant Nutrient Management 
(Contd.)  
 
Welcom e friends to this fifty seco nd lecture of NPTEL  online certification course of Soil 
Fertility and F ertilizers . And we are currently at week 11.  
(Refer Slide Time:  00:33)  
 
And in this week we are discussing about Fertilizer Recommendation Approaches and 
Integrated Plant N utrient M anagement. Now, in our previous lecture of this week that is 
lecture number 51, we have discussed about the basic concepts of fertilizer  recommendation 
approaches and we have also discussed the potential concept. Now, in this lect ure we are 
going to focus on the following concepts.  (Refer Slide Time:  01:03)  
 
So, we are going to discuss this concept first of all, we are going to discuss the attainable 
yield  level and actually level . What are the differences between these attainab le yield and 
actually yield and how they differ from potential yield ? And then there will be some recap of 
the previous some of the previous concepts which we have already discussed. These are soil fertility diagnostic techniques, then nutrient deficiency symptoms of plant and then soil testing interpretation techniques and then soil chemical test rating. So, we are going to discuss briefly those which we ha ve discussed already in details.  
We are going to discuss them or recap  them briefly because these wi ll be required for 
continuation of this week and this will  need, we need a recap of this concept before we can 
discuss the nutrient recommendation approaches.  (Refer Slide Time:  02:12)  
 
So, let us start with the keywords . These are the keywords like  attainable yield, then actual 
yield,  indicator plants , soil chemical analysis and soil testing interpretation . So, these are 
some of the keywords of this lecture. W e are going to learn the definition of attainable yield, 
actual yield  and we have alr eady know what are the indicator  plants and we are going to also 
discuss the summary of soil chemical analysis and how to interpret the soil test results.  
(Refer Slide Time:  02:43)  
 
Now, if we recall our knowledge of potential yield from the fifty first lecture, that is th e 
previous lecture of this week. W e know that potential yield  basically is the optimum yield for 
optimum management condition. And the factors which affect crop growth in potential yield level are basically temperature,  solar radiation, carbon dioxide concentration day length and 
genetic factors.  
Now, this level of model mainly includes basic crop growth processes like photosynthesis, 
respiration, tissue growth and development. So, these are the major factors while considering 
the potential yield.  Now, the main use of this level is to gain knowledge on how these factors 
affect potential production of a crop assuming that water and fertilizer  are adequate and that 
no pest damage occur.  
So, basically in this potential level, we are not concerned about the management practices, 
variation in inputs and also the pests and disease attacks. So, potential yield  level basically is 
the optimum growth or optimum yield of the plant considering all considering that other management and insect based factors are at optimum level and we are only considering the temperature variation , solar radiation, carbon dioxide concentration,  day length and genetic 
factors which influence photosynthesis, respiration, tissue growth and development. So, basic physiological proces ses are only concerned while discussing the potential.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 04:46)  
 
Now, let us see what is attainable. Now, this level deals with the effect of water and nitrogen fertilizer  limitation  to produce attainable yield. S o, the basic difference between potential 
yield  and attainable yield  is in case of attainable yield  we are also including the factors of 
fertilizer  and also the water limitations. So, nitrogen is assumed to be supplied. W e know that 
while we are discussing the nitrogen management , there are several ways of nitrogen inputs . First of all,  we can apply to the fertilizer  management , nitrogen can be added through rainfall 
and also nitrogen can be added to soil organic matter.  
So, these are some of the ways to which nitrogen can be managed, we have already discussed 
the nitrogen management previously, but, so, basically it is nitrogen management as well as 
water based limitations are the major controlling factor s of attainable yield.  
(Refer Slide Time:  06:04)  
 
Now, the third yield is the actual yield. So, it deals with all the factors that control growth in a 
field including pest  damage and mismanagement. So, in case of potential yield we are only 
considering the plant physiological factors , physiol ogical processes, in the actual  yield  in the 
in attainable we are considering the variation due to nitrogen fertilizer  as well as water 
limitation. And in case of actual yield  level we are considering the factors including pest  
damage and mismanagement.  
So, if we see that difference of poten tial yield to an attainable yield  and actually yield  these  
graph shows a good comparison. So, here you can see the highest yield or most optimum 
yield  is the potential yield and of course, the attainability yield  will be less than the potential 
because there is a variation due to the nitrogenous mentors and management and water management. So, we can see there are also two types of attainable. So, this yellow bar shows 
the maximum attainable yield  in very favorable  season whereas, this orange bar shows 
attainable yield in average season.  
So, you can see there are yield  gaps as we move from yield  potential yield  to maximum 
attainable yield and attainable yield and the final one is actual  yield . So, this is the lowest one and here we are also including the im pact of pest  and disease attacks. So, these are the 
differences between potential yield and then attainable yield  and actual yield.  
(Refer Slide Time:  08:03)  
 
Now, let us discuss the soil fertility evaluation through diagnostic techniques and some of 
them we have already covered. Now, it will  be a kind of a recap of those which we have 
already covered in details, so, that we can relate these to the upcoming discussion of nutrient 
management for plant growth or recommendation approaches.  
(Refer Slide Time : 08:35)  
 
So, soil fertility evaluation as we know is essential for balanced nutrition of the crops. Now, 
what is balanced nutrition?  Now, balanced nutrient use refers to applying essential plant nutrients in the right amount and proportion using the corr ect method. We  are going to 
discuss the four concepts in upcoming lectures. But remember that not only the essential 
plant nutrients has to be applied, we have to apply them in the right amount and proportion 
using the correct method and application suited  for specific crop and soil crop climatic 
conditions. So, it has to be used for specific soil crop climatic situation.  
Now, balance crop or for balance fertilization  for crops always helps us in maintaining and 
improving the soil productivity. The soil fe rtility valuation is the key to adequate and 
balanced fertilizer  in the crop production. If we do not know what is the current nutrition 
status of the soil, we cannot formulate the balanced fertilization  strategy for better  and 
optimum growth of the plant.  Now several techniques are commonly used to assess the soil 
fertility and now a proper evolution of soil fertility before planting a crop helps in adopting 
appropriate measures to compensate for the  shortcoming and ensure good crop production.  
(Refer Sli de Time:  10:17)  
 
Now, we already know these concepts, what are the major diagnostic techniques . First of all 
nutrient deficiency symptoms of the plant, we have discussed them in details, while 
discussing different types of macro and micronutrients. And then tissue analysis from the 
plants which are growing in the soil. And then biological tests in which the growth of higher plants or certain microorganism is used as a measure of soil fertility. And finally, and  most 
importantly, soil testing. W e have already discussed those in details, we are just going to see 
the salient points so that we can relate them with the fertilizer  recommendation strategies, 
which we are going to discuss.  (Refer Slide Time:  11:07)  
 
Now, if we see the nutrient deficiency symptoms  of the plant, we have discussed them in 
details, already we have seen the visible symptoms of the plant, which they produce due to 
different types of nutrient states , either through nutrient defic iency or due to nutritional 
nutrient toxicity we have discussed. However, we have to also discuss some of the practical problems, while we use the deficiency visual deficiency symptoms to correct the soil fertility and deduce the balance fertilization dose. T here are some practical problem .  
First of all, when we know that when a plant badly needs a certain nutrient element, it shows 
the deficiency symptoms. So, these symptoms are very much nutrients specific we know and also shows different patterns in crop for different essential nutrients, we know that . For 
exam ple, in c ase of nitrogen, we have seen yel lowing of the leaves and also we have seen the 
stunting of the growth and also in case of phosphate, we phosphorus deficiency we have seen,  
reddish discoloration and all these different types of nutrients have thei r own deficiency 
visual deficiency symptoms.  
Now, it is an excellent tool to detect the deficiencies of nutrients in the field, but these 
techniques  have several limitations. W hat are these limitation ? First of all, the visual 
symptoms may be caused by more than one in nutrient. So, there are some visible symptoms 
which may cause by more than one nutrient. So, there is always chance of confusion to 
identify what is the proper nutrition deficiency or deficient nutrient . Second is deficiency of 
one nutrient may be related to excess quantity of another. So, there are several nutrient antagonism we have already discussed or when there are nutrient antagonism that can also creates deficiency of a specific nutrient when there is an excess quantity of another  nutrient. 
For example, phosphorus and zinc shows this type of relationship.  
Now, it is difficult to distinguish among the deficiencies in terms in the field as disease or 
insect damage can resemble certain micronutrient deficiencies. So, when there are diseas es or 
insect damages, you can see that some visual deficiency symptoms resemble with  the nutrient 
deficiency visible symptoms. So, that also creates confusion. And another one is nutrient deficiency symptoms are observed only after the crop has already suf fered and irreversible 
loss. So, if we want to take some PMT measure to correct the nutritional problem or nutrient 
deficiency in the soil, visual deficiency symptoms may not be the optimum solution.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 14:17)  
 
So, we also know there are several indicator plans , we know for Oat, Oat  is can be used for 
identification of nutrient deficiencies  toxicity or magnesium, manganese and copper 
deficiency. So , we can see the magnesium, mang anese and copper deficiency by O at. We can 
use wheat and barl ey for identifying the magnesium and copper and sometimes manganese 
deficiencies. We can use sugar beet to see the boron and manganese deficiency . We can use 
maize for nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, magnesium, iron, manganese and zinc 
deficiencies . Potat oes can be used for potassium, magnesi um and manganese deficiencies.  
Rapeseed can be u sed for nitrogen,  phosphorus and magnesium deficiencies. B rassica species 
can be used for potassium and magnesium deficiencies . Sudan  grass can be used for iron and 
mang anese deficiencies. C elery  and sunflower can be used for boron deficiency . Cauliflower 
can be used as a indicator plan t for boron and molybdenum deficiency. And then we can see flax can be used for zinc deficiency . Barley can be used for b oron, manganese and aluminum  
toxicities . Cucumber can be used for nitrogen and phosphorus excess, and then sugar beets 
can be used for also we have seen . Sugar beets  can be used for boron and manganese 
deficiencies. We can also use sugar beets for excess of copper in the s oil.  
So, these are some of the indicator plans. And so, we have this now, we know the what are 
the drawbacks of visual deficiencies in terms of the plant.  
(Refer Slide Time:  16:02)  
 
Now, on the other hand concentration of an element in plant tissue is generally positively 
correlated with the plant health . Therefore, plant analysis specifically tissue analysis has been 
used as a diagnostic tool to determine the nutritional cause of plant disorder or diseases.  (Refer Slide Time:  16:22)  
 
So, the plant an alysis generally constitutes of several steps . We have already discussed just to 
recap a collection of the representative plant part at the specific growth stage. T hen, we wash 
them , dry them and grind them and then oxidation of those powder plant samples to 
solubilize the elements which are there in the tissue . Their estimation of different elements 
and interpretation of the mutation status with respect to deficiencies, sufficiency, toxicity, and 
based on the  non-critical concentration. So, these are the s teps of plant tissue analysis.  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:00)  
 
Now, in the narrow sense , plant analysis is basically the determination of the concentration of 
an element or extractable fraction of an element in a sample taken from a particular part or 
portion of the crop at a specific time or stage of morphological development we know that . Now plant analysis is complementary to soil analysis or soil testing. Now, in many situation , 
the total or even available content of an element in soil fails to correlate w ith the plant tissue  
concentration or the growth and yield of the crop. These are several there are several reasons . 
First of all, for example, physiochemical soil physical chemical properties are so complex 
and they have so many interactions among them that can also influence the mismatch 
between the plant tissue concentration as well as the soil level of a nutrient .  
And also due to the variation of the root growth patents and uptake mechanism there is also 
discrepancies between available nutrient content  in the soil as well as the concentration of the 
nutrient in the plant tissue.  Now, these are some of the reason where we can see some 
discrepancies between the plant tissue concentration as well and available nutrients in the 
soil.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:30) 
 
Now, in case of plant tissue analysis, they have different types of application. F irst of all , 
diagnoses of nutrient deficiencies, toxicities and imbalances and then measurement of quantity of the nutrients removed by the crops , to replace them in or der to maintain soil 
fertility . Then estimation of overall nutritional status of the region or soil types and then 
monitoring the effectiveness of the fertilization  practices adopted and then estimation of the 
nutrient levels in the diets available to the livestock.  
So, these are some of the practical application, when it comes when we go in we discuss the 
plant tissue analysis for nutritional deficiency identification.  (Refer Slide Time:  19:17)  
 
Now, the third approach for nutritional status of the soi l for testing the nutritional status of 
the soil is a biological test using some higher plants are some specific microorganisms. Now, 
the biological we are also known as these are also known as the biological methods. Now, 
these biological methods are basi cally depends on raising a crop or in microbial culture in a 
field or the soil and estimating its fertility from the volume of the crop on that microbial 
accounts.  
Now, although these methods are direct estimates of soil fertility, they are time consuming  
and therefore not well adapted to the practice of soil testing. So, these are some of the drawbacks of this biological test.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 20:06)  
 Now, the absence of nutrients site , if we considered the biological pest  in the absence of 
nutrients,  certain microorganisms exhibit behavior  similar to that higher plants. For examp le, 
if you see the growth of Azotobacter and Asperg illus nig er those microorganisms or growth 
of those microorganism reflects nutrient deficiency in the soil. Now, the soil is  rated from 
very deficient to not deficient in the respective elements depending on the amount of the 
colony growth.  
So, basically those nutrients will  be taken up by those microorganisms and they will  develop 
the colony and based on the number of colonie s, we can identify we can categorize the 
nutritional status of the soil or media . Now, in comparison with methods that utilize  higher 
plants, microbiological methods are rapid, simple and require little space. So, these laboratory 
tests are however not ver y commonly used in India. In India , we generally use either 
deficiency symptoms as well as soil testing based to evaluation of soil fertility and to some 
extent plant tissue test.  
(Refer Slide Time:  21:25)  
 
Now, soil testing again we have discussed in de tails. Now, we know that soil testing is the 
chemical analysis that provides a guideline for amendments and fertilizer  need of soil. Now, 
the primary advantage of soil testing when it is compared to the plant analysis is its ability to 
determine the nutrie nt status of the soil before the crop is planted. Now, this is the method 
which we can use before the planting of the crop. So, the soil testing is done with the 
following objectives we already discussed the soil testing objectives but again that soil 
fertility evaluation for making fertilizer  recommendations are first and foremost objective 
then prediction of likely crop response to apply nutrient .  Then classification of soil into different fertility groups for preparing soil fertility maps of a 
given are a. And then assessment of the type and degree of soil related problems like salinity , 
sodicity , et cetera and suggesting appropriate reclamation and emulation measures. So, once 
we measure the soil fertility  using soil testing methods, we will be able to s ee whether the soil 
is problematic soil or not . If the soil is problematic, that means if it is as highly acidic soil or  
alkaline  or it is a kind of a saline soil then we can prescribe the appropriate amelioration  
measures like lime application , gypsum applications and then frequent irrigation application 
for reducing the salinity organic matter applications.  
So, these are some of the remedial measures or amelioration measures to correct the soil 
fertility. So, these are very much important as far as the s oil testing is concerned.  
(Refer Slide Time:  23:22)  
 
Now, a  soil testing programmes , we know that is basically composed of several steps like 
sample collection, chemical analysis, interpretation of the results and fertilizer  
recommendation.  (Refer Slid e Time:  23:35)  
 
So, if we also recall the chemical methods which we  used for determination of different 
nutrients, when w e go for the total nitrogen estimation , we use a Kjeldahl  method. Now, there 
are some merits and demerits. First of all , this method i s time consuming , lengthy and costly. 
So, this is the major demerit and rate of mineralization nitrogen  varies with the soil. Now, 
organic carbon we generally use by Walkl ey and B lack method and this method is simple and 
rapid and based on the CN ratio, which is of course variable from one cell to another soil .  
Then alkaline KMnO4 . So, once we calculate this organic carbon from there, we can get 
these you can use the CN ratio to calculate the nitrogen. So, this i s an another indirect way 
however, the CN ra tio varies from one soil  to another soil. T hen alkaline KMnO4  method 
which is used for nitrogen and which extract part of organic and mineral nitrogen. So, this is 
the most widely used method alkaline KMnO4  to identify the available fraction of nitrogen.  
Now Olsen’s method for alkaline soils for when we talk about the phosphate we use a 
Olsen’s method for alkaline and soils and Bray’s  method for acid soils. Now, Olsen’s 
methods are highly effective for these alkaline soil  because high efficiency of this 
bicarbonate ion which is also in reagent sodium bicarbonate, which you use this bicarbonate 
ion can remove the phosphorus from calcium, aluminum and iron and reduce the activity of 
the calcium and basically it is used in slightly acidic neutral and alkaline soil .  
On the contrary,  Bray’s  method can be used to extract the phosphorus from the acidic soil. 
So, and for potas sium that is K2O we can measure by neutral normal ammonium acetate which is showing the higher efficiency of extraction as compared to salt s olution and it is 
inefficient to remove part of non- exchangeable potassium, which is available to some extent.  
Now, here remember that these the high efficiency of this fluoride ion, which i s F minus 
please, so, this F  minus let me so, the fluoride ion is  able to dissolve this phosphate from the 
soil specifically from the acidic soil condition and thereby they can measure the available  
phosphate and so, these are the basic methods for measurement of different nutrients 
available and total form of different  nutrients.  
(Refer Slide Time:  26:52)  
 
 So, if we go ahead and see for Sulphur , we can see, we use the 0.15 percent  Calcium 
chloride to extract the water soluble Sulphur  and adsorbed Sulphur  and heat soluble Sulphur  
can extract the water soluble Sulphur  and organic Sulphur . It is also time consuming and 
lengthy procedure . And in case of micronutrients we use DTPA as the chelating agent and we 
extract the complex chelat ed and absorb. W e can extract these nutrients in the complex 
chelat ed and adsorbed forms . So, these are the methods of soil testing.  (Refer Slide Time:  27:27)  
 
Now, the next is once we do the testing next is interpretation. Now, based on the nutritional 
status we can divide them into low medium and high and of course, we have to also consi der 
the soil condition whether it is the acidic or alkaline or saline soil and of course, it has to be 
this interpretation has to be soil specific and crop specific .  
(Refer Slide Time:  27:51)  
 
And the next is the recommendation. So, more fertilizer  does not manifest more uptake or 
yield . So, this is very important and we can see these from the next couple of slides.  (Refer Slide Time:  28:07)  
 
 
So, if we can see here this shows an FLD  experience in West Bengal in India. So, as we 
increase the fertilize r application you can see the uptake of the nutrient is not increasing but it 
is decreasing and also it is increasing somewhat up to 70 kg per hectare and then it starts 
decreasing. So, we can see it is nitrogen uptake  with grain is not always positive with the 
increasing amount of fertilizer , so, that shows that more fertilizer  does not manifest more 
uptake or yield .  (Refer Slide Time:  28:48)  
 
Similarly , if we can see phosphorus uptake by wheat grain when we are increasing the 
phosphate concentration in the fertilizer , we can see the yield is also decreasing after a certain 
level.  
(Refer Slide Time:  29:05)  
  
So, we can see for nitrogen and phosphate the higher fertilizer  not always mani fests the 
higher uptake or yield  of the crop.  
(Refer Slide Time:  29:19)  
 
So, interpretation recommendation and of course, while you go for the interpretation 
recommendation, we use some general recommendation or generalized  recommendation. W e 
can use some soil test rating . We can use critical soil test level approach . We can also use 
Colwell’s approach. W e also use percentage of yield  maximum approach and soil analysis 
crop correlation approach and then targeted yield  concepts. So , these are some of the 
approaches which we use for interpretation and recommendation of the soil fertility status.  (Refer Slide Time:  29:55)  
 
Now, generalized  recommendation it is based on fertilizer  rate experiments and it is an 
optimum dose of fertilizer  is recommended and it  the generalize, recommendation practices 
involve wastage of fertilizers  in some cases and under usage in others . So, generalized  
recommendation processes can create a wastage of fertilizer  in some cases and under usage in 
of some fertilizers .  
(Refer Slide Time:  30:29)  
 
Now, the soil test ratings as a soil test are ca librated into different fertility categories like low , 
medium and high and fertilizer  adjustments are may  not entirely on quality business, but on a 
semi -quantitative basis and it is only diagnostic or indicative of nutrient deficiency or 
sufficiency on an area basis.  (Refer Slide Time:  30:53)  
 
And this low , medium , high concept which we use for fertility status description it is in the 
context of subsistence of agriculture or commercial agriculture.  
(Refer Slide Time:  31:05)  
 
So, we can see if the categorization of available nutrients, we can see alkaline KMnO4  has a 
medium value range of 250 to 500 kg per hectare. In case of Olsen P2O5, we can see 28 to 
56. Neutral  normal ammonium acetate extracted potassium oxides, we can see 140 to 280. I n 
case of Su lphur , 10 to 20 ppm. T hen for iron , manganese,  zinc and copper we can see 5 to 10 
and then 0.5 to 1  and 0.2 to 0.4.  And hot water soluble boron in ppm 0.1 to 0.5 ppm. So, these 
are the medium ranges and lower than that will be low category and higher than that will be 
higher category.  (Refer Slide Time:  31:53)  
 
So, guys, we have completed the discussing a discussion about the attainable concept as well 
as the actual concepts . And we have seen the salient features of the soil fertility evaluation 
methods a nd how we go for soil fertility interpretation and recommendation.  
And let us wrap up this lecture here and in the next lecture we are going to discuss the  other 
important concepts of fertiliz er recommendation for optimum growt h of the plant and we wi ll 
see how we can use different other approaches for formulating a balanced nutrition for crop 
growth.  
(Refer Slide Time:  32:51)  
 
So, let us wrap up this lecture. Thank you. Let us meet in our next lecture.  