Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Department  of Agriculture and Food  Engineering  
Indian Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture 59 
Agricultural  Productivity  and Environmental  Quality  (Contd.)  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:13) 
 
Welcome  friends  to this Lecture Number  59 of NPTEL  Online  Certification  Course  of Soil 
Fertility  and Fertilizers . And we are currently  at week  12 where  we are discussing  
agricultural  productivity  and environmental  quality.  In our previous  couple  of lectures,  we 
have  discussed  the issues related  to agricultural  productivity and environment.  We have  
started  our discussion  regarding with the carbon  sequestration.  
And then we have  seen how agricultural  practices  are important  for carbon  sequestration,  
why carbon  sequestration is important  for sustaining our environment.  And then,  we have  
discussed  about  the environmental  problems  or pollutions  which  are related  to excessive use 
of chemical  fertilizers.  And then,  in the last lecture,  we have  discussed  in details  about  the 
stubble  burning issue  in India,  why farmers  prefer  stubble  burning , what  are the reasons  and 
what  are the health  impacts  and other  environmental  impacts  of stubble  burning.  
And also, we have  tried to find out the solutions  for the stubble  burning.  Now, in this lecture,  
we are going to see some  of the impacts  of conservation agriculture  as compared  to the 
conventional  agriculture.  We know  about  conservation  agriculture  in detail,  I mean  we have  
discussed  the conservation agriculture  in details.  However , now,  in this lecture  we are going  to compare the impact  of conservation agriculture  
with the conventional  agriculture  and then we are going to see the impact  of this conservation 
agriculture  on some  soil physi co-chemical  properties,  structural  stability,  bug density,  
infiltration  of water  and so on. So, this lecture is focused  on conservation agriculture  and its 
impacts  on soil physical  properties  and hydraulic  properties.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  02:34)  
 
These  are the concepts  which  we are going to discuss in this lecture.  First of all, there will be 
a recall  of the definition  of conservation  agriculture . And then, we are going to discuss the 
problems  which  are associated  with conventional  agriculture.  And then,  we are going to 
discuss the conservation  agricul ture-based  management  practices  and their benefits  for the 
agro-ecosystem.  So, these  are the major  topics  for this lecture.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  03:01)  
 
And these  are the some  of the keywords  for this lecture,  soil water  retention,  conventional  
agriculture , structural  properties , hydraulic  properties  and water  stubble  aggregates.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  03:12)  
 
So, we all know  that green  revolution has increased  food grain  production by many  fold with 
adoption of high yielding  varieties,  extensive  tillage  and intensive  inputs  use etc. Since  last 5 
decades  we are seeing , 5 to 6 decades  we are seeing  the impact  of green  revolution in India  
and several  new high yielding  varieties  have  been introduced,  we are focusing now on 
extensive  tillage , intensive  input  use, and as a result,  there has been  an increase in food grain  
production also. So, the intensive , but at the same  time this intensive  cultivation  has led to degradation of 
natural  resources  such as soil, water,  vegetation,  etc. So, although we have  received  the 
beneficial  impacts  of fruits  of green  revolution,  at the same  time we have  also continuously 
reduced  the quality  of natural  resources  and we have degraded  the natural  resources  like soil, 
water , and vegetation.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  04:29)  
 
Now,  what  are the problems  which  are associated  with conventional  agriculture ? If we list 
those  major  problems , first of all soil organic  matter  reduction.  As we know  that continuous  
cultivation  can reduce the soil organic  matter  and that is why we have  advocated  the carbon 
sequestration . And also, when  there  is a loss of organic  matter  that will also link to the 
reduction of soil fertility  and physical  structure  because organic  matter  is the one of the major  
fractions  which  maintains  the soil fertility  and physical  stability  because of the binding 
capability . 
However,  when  there is a loss of organic  matter,  there is a reduction of soil fertility  and 
physical  structure  also. Increase erosion,  land degradation,  soil contamination,  then high 
labor  and energy  requirements  and extra carbon  dioxide  emission  into atmosphere , so all 
these  are the problems  or harmful  impacts  of conventional  agriculture . When  there is an 
increased  erosion that accelerates  the land degradation.  
Also,  use of chemical  fertilizers  can reduce  the soil quality and increase the soil 
contamination  then also that involves  a high labor  and energy  requirements , extra  carbon  dioxide  emission  requirements . So, all these  are problems  which  are associated  with 
conventional  agriculture.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  06:00)  
 
Now, let us recall  the definition of conservation agriculture.  So, conservation agriculture  can 
be defined  as a concept  for resource saving intercultural  crop production that strives  to 
achieve acceptable profits  together  with high and sustained  production levels  while  
concurrently conserving the environment . This is a FAO definition  which  was given in 2009.  
So, again,  remember  this is a concept  of resource saving agricultur al production,  which  
achieved  the acceptable profits  together  with high end sustained  production  levels,  while  
concurrently conserving the environment.  
So, not only we are focusing  on increasing  our agricultural  products,  but at the same  time,  we 
are not deteriorating  the environment  we are maintaining  the environment , we are conserving 
the environment . So, this is the crux of the conservation agriculture.  The conservation 
agricult ure has emerged  as an alternative  strategy  for conserving the natural  resources . Of 
course,  when  you talk about  the conservation of natural  resources,  the conserva tion 
agriculture  has become an important  tool nowadays  which  we can use for conserving these  
natural  resources.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  07:30)  
 
Now,  what  are the principles  of conservation agriculture ? We know  that there  are major  three 
principle , first of all, minimum  soil disturbance  and then crop residue  retention  and crop 
rotation.  So, these  are the three  major  I would  say pillars  of conservation agriculture . First of 
all, minimum  mechanical  soil disturbance,  there  is no tillage  through  direct  seed and or 
fertilizer  placement.  
Secondly,  permanent  soil organic  cover  at least 30 percent  with crop residues  and or cover  
crops . And finally,  species  diversification  through vary crop sequence and associations  
involving at least three  different  crop species.  So, these three  are the major  principles  of 
conservation agriculture,  while  we minimize  the soil disturbance  that will conserve  not only 
the organic  matter,  that will increase the organic  matter  content  or stock  of organic  carbon  in 
the soil, then permanent  soil organic  cover.  
So, when  there is a permanent  solar  organic  cover  at least 30 percent  using the crop residues  
that also can favorably impact  the soil physic o-chemical  properties . And finally,  when  we are 
rotating  different  crops,  we are maintaining  the species diversification . When there is a 
species  diversification  that can also improve  the agricultural  products  and maintaining  the 
soil fertility.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  09:04)  
 
Now,  if we see the conservation agricultural  practices,  there are several  ways  and let us see. 
First of all, residue  retention  is one of the major  ways  of conservation agriculture.  So, when  
we retain  the residue  that helps  in less water  in wind  erosion,  high water  holding  capacity,  
less evaporation and then nutrient  recycling  and tempe rature  moisture  moderation.  So, all 
these  are impacts  of residue  retention . 
And then we can see crop rotation  which  reduces  the climatic  risk and then distributes  the 
nutrients  in soil profile  and then reduces  the risk of weed,  pest and diseases  and then 
increases  biological  functioning,  and finally,  increases  organic  carbon . And minimum soil 
disturbances  is another  important  conservation  agricultural  practice  we know  that it helps  in 
limiting  the tillage  to seeding  zone and then energy saving,  it reduces  the erosion  and 
greenhouse  gas emission  and then it protects  the soil organic  carbon , and finally,  it improves  
the soil properties.  
So, we can see that there  is a linkage  between  this minimum soil disturbance  and residue  
retention.  So, that is basically  microclimate  enhancement,  so it increases  the system's  
adaptive  capacity  when  we minimize  the soil disturbance  and we retain  the residue . And at 
the same  time,  there  is also a linkage  between  residue  retention , crop rotation  because that 
can improve  the soil resilience by maintaining  the soil diversity.  
And then also here there  is a relationship  between  minimum  soil disturbance  and crop 
rotation  so that basically  helps  in system  resilience use and served  by sustaining  the food 
security.  So, you can see all these three  pillars  of residue  retention,  crop rotation  and minimizing  the soil disturbance  are connected  and they connectively  they achieve  the major  
goals  of conservation  agriculture,  which  are increasing  the system  adaptive  capacity,  
improving soil resilie nce and sustaining food security.  So, these  are the three  major  
objectives  of conservation agricultural  practices.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:31)  
 
Now,  when  we talk about  the structur al hydraulic  properties  of the soil let us discuss what  are 
the structural  and hydraulic  properties . Of course,  structural  properties  when  you talk about  
that encompasses  the structural  properties  are basically  bulk density,  soil structure  and 
aggregat ion stability  and then soil strength  and then hydraulic  properties  are infiltration  and 
hydraulic  conductivity.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  11:58)  
 
Now,  let us see what  are the impacts  of conservation  agricultural  practices  on soil bulk 
density.  Now,  soil bulk density  is an indicator  of soil compaction  and porosity  and it is 
expressed  as the weight  of dry soil in a given volume . And it indirectly  affects  the root 
penetration  that is important  for plant  growth  because if the bulk density is high then root will 
not penetrate  there will be hindrance  for germination  of the crop so we can see that how 
important  the soil bulk densit y is. 
So, what  are the factors  which  impact  the soil bulk density?  Soil texture,  then mineralogy,  
particle  size and structure , organic  matter , type of crops  or varieties  and management  
practices  including tillage,  intercul tural operation , residue s retention  or incorporation , all 
these  impacts  the bulk density.  Because when  there  is a light texture  soil their bulk density 
will be different  than heavy  texture  soil. 
Mineralogy helps  in determining  the bulk density.  Then tillag e operations  help determines  the 
bulk density because when  there is a heavy  implement in an intensive  tillage  that will 
increase the bulk density and create hard a pan. Inter cultur al operations  are also important  
for moderating  the bulk density.  So, all these are very important,  I would say regulators  of 
bulk density.  Now,  there are some  contradictory results  of research  work  conducted on the 
effect  of conservation tillage  on the soil bulk density of course . (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:44)  
 
Now, let us see the mean  bulk density for the four treatment.  So, here we can see here four 
treatments , one is NT, that is no tillage  with straw  cover,  then ST stands  for subsoiling with 
straw  cover,  then RT stands  for rototilling  with straw  cover , and TT stands  for traditio nal 
ploughing.  So, one thing you can see in case of traditional ploughing the mean  bulk density  
has increased . 
However,  for all the conservation practices  the mean  bulk density has decreased.  So, we can 
see that the conservation agricultural  practices  have  better  impact  on bulk density and they 
can reduce the bulk density  of the soil by incorporating more  organic  matter  in the soil. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:34)  
 Also,  we can see that in this graph,  there is a B.D is negatively  correlated  with crop residue  
return that is B.D decreases  with or bulk density decreases  with increasing  crop residue  
returns.  So, as we incorporate  more  crop residue  you can see soil bulk density will decrease  
and there  is a linear  relationship . So, more  incorporation  of crop residue  as a result  of 
conservation agriculture  can help in reducing the soil bulk density.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:10)  
 
Also,  we can see in this slide that there  are four different  crop rotation,  here you can see MFS  
stands  for maize- fallow -soybean,  MFM stands  for maize- fallow -maize,  MWM stands  for 
maize- wheat -maize,  and MWS stands  for maize- wheat -soybean.  So, we can see this graph 
shows  the effects  of crop rotation  on bulk density  after 3 years  of cropping.  One thing  we can 
see that inclusion of pulses . 
So, when  there is a soybean like here you can see maize- wheat -soybean , so and then you can 
see MFS,  so here also incorporation of pulses  here so it augments  more  carbon  in the soil, 
which  results  in decrement  in bulk density  as negative  correlation  exists  between  associate  
bulk density.   
So, we know  that, there  will be more  incorporation of organic  carbon  if we incorporate  the 
pulse  crop in the crop rotation  and that will decrease further  the bulk density.  So, you can see 
comparative,  when  we comparing  the bulk density  of different  crop rotation , when  there  is an 
incorporation of pulses,  there  is a decrease of bulk density of soil. (Refer  Slide  Time:  16:44)  
 
Now,  let us see the impact  of solid  aggregates.  Now, individual  soil particles  like sand,  silt 
and clay bound together  by suitable  binding agents  and form  larger  units  that is soil 
aggregate.  So, stability  of soil aggregates  against  different  stresses like water , tillage  etcetera 
are quite  important for assessment  of structural  stability . 
Under conventional  tillage  aggregate stability  is too low to withstand  against  impacts  of 
rainwater,  then irrigation  and tillage  compared  to the zero tillage,  no tillage,  minimum  tillage  
with other  conservation practices . And higher  aggregate stability  under  conservation  
agricultur e is the result  of three major  processes . First of all, retention  of organic  residue  on 
soil surface,  which  reduces  detachment  and disintegration  of the soil aggregates.  
Secondly,  decomposition  of organic  matter  increases  the aggregation  process  and then no soil 
disturbance  increases  the fungal  hyphae  and soil microbes.  So, these  are the three  major  
reasons  which  impacts  the aggregate stability  under  conservation agriculture  because the 
fungal  hyphae  acts as a binding  agents  for the aggregates . 
And then when there  is a decomposition  of organic  matter  that will also help in binding  the 
soil particles  and retention  of organic  residues  will also help in reducing  the detachment  and 
disintegration  of the soil aggregates.  So, this is how we can see in case of conservation  
agriculture  we get the higher  aggregate stability . (Refer  Slide  Time:  18:20)  
 
Also, in this slide  we can see side by side the impact  of conservation  agriculture  and the 
conventional  tillage  on soil aggregate  stability  and mean  weight  diameter.  So, we can see soil 
aggregate is more  in case of no tillage  condition  as compared  to the conventional  tillage . And 
mean  weight  diameter  is also higher  in case of no tillage  as compared  to the conventional  
tillage.  So, the greater  proportion  of macro aggregat es leads  to larger  mean  weight  diameter  in 
case of conservation agriculture.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:56)  
 
Also,  we can see here as the mulching rate is increasing,  the mean  weight  diameter  is also 
increasing.  So, both mean  weight  diameter  and water  stable  aggregates  and also you can see the water  stubble  aggregates  are also increasing.  So, there  is a positive  relationship  between  
the mulching rate with the mean  weight  diameter  and water  stubble  aggregates.   
So, both mean  weight  diameter  and water  stubble  aggregates  are positively  correlated  with 
residue  rate and mean  weight  diameter  and percentage of water  stable  aggregates  increases  
with increasing  residue  rate. And so, that shows  the importance  of conservation agricultural  
practices  for improving the soil physical  condition . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:38)  
 
What are the effects  on infiltration , water  infiltration ? Now, depending  on the level  of soil 
disturbance,  different  tillage  practices  could affect  the ability  of the soil to adsorb  and retain  
water.  Now,  surface residue  cover  effect  is generally  greater  than the soil disturbance  effect  
for maintaining  high infiltration  rate and reducing  the soil loss. So, the residue  intercepts  
rainfall  and releases  it more  slowly  afterwards . (Refer  Slide  Time:  20:05)  
 
We can see here the cumulative  infiltration  rates which  is measured  in 13 years  after 
implementation  of the field trial. We can see in case of the conventional  tillage  in cumulative  
infiltration  rate is increasing  at a slower  rate. However,  in case of conservat ion agricultural  
practices  we can see there has been  a huge  increase or steep  increase in cumulative  
infiltration  rate in both these  two conditions.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:38)  
 
Also,  if we can see the effect  on hydraulic  conductivity.  Now, hydraulic  conduc tivity  of the 
soil is a measure of soil’s ability  to transmit water  within  soil profile . What are the factors  
which  impact  the soil hydraulic  conductivity?  Like topography,  climate  and barren  material 
type, magnitude  or intensity  of tillage  also plays  a major role in altering  the saturated  hydraulic  conductivity . And also, because bulk density and porosity  are also supposed to be 
altered.  Now,  Ksat a saturated  hydraulic  conductivity is highly  dependent  upon the size, 
continuity and arrangement  of pores.  
(Refer Slide  Time:  21:23)  
 
So, we can see the increase in the saturated  hydraulic  conductivity under  conservation 
practices . It decreas e in bulk density and increase in effective pore volume  because the better  
soil aggregation in these  practices . So, as a result there is an increase in saturated  hydraulic  
conductivity we can see from  this graph . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:48)  
 Also, we can see that hydraulic  conductivity positively correlated  with residue  retention.  So, 
higher  soil infiltration  rates  and saturated hydraulic  conductivity values  in zero tillage  we can 
see because of in this zero tillage  we can see formation  of root channels  in soil and then 
boosted earthworm  activity  because of zero tillage . And then formation  of continuous  soil 
bio-pores  and presen ce of continuous  macropores.  So, these  are facilitated  by zero tillage  and 
as a result,  there  will be higher  soil infiltration.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:25)  
 
So, summar ily. We can see that tillage , the conventional  intensive  tillage  destroys  soil 
structure , however,  conservation agriculture  builds  are better  structural  and hydraulic  
properties  of the soil. When we go for crop rotation  that influences  the soil structural  and 
hydraulic  properties  with rooting properties  especially  when  legume  incorporated in cropping  
sequence.  
Because when  we incorporate  the legume  in the soil that fixes  not only the atmospheric  
nitrogen,  but also after their cultivation,  we incorporated them  in the soil to improve  the soil 
fertility . And as a result,  not only they are incorpora ting the nitrogen,  but also, they are 
incorporating organic  matter  because we are mixing the crop directly  in the soil. So, that 
increases  the soil organic  matter  and positively  impacts  the soil structural  and hydraulic  
properties.  
Also,  residue  retention  expands the residence time of water  retention  as well as infiltration.  
So, these  are the benefits  of conservation agricultural  practices  as compared  to the 
conventional  agricultural  practices.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  23:44)  
 
Now,  if we see the conservation agriculture,  we can see the, of course,  these  are the three 
pillars  we have  discussed  minimal  soil disturbance,  then maximum soil cover  and crop 
diversification.  So, we can see summarily  that potential  soil health  benefits  following the 
conservation agricultu re adoption and SOC  increase we can see increased  soil structural  
stability  and decreased erosion.  
We can also see increased  water  infiltration  in soil water  storage,  increased  soil nutrient  
stores and then increased  soil biological  abundance  and diversity  and increased  yield  and 
profitability.  So, these  are the impacts  of this conservation  agriculture.  So, future  needs  to 
increase the conservation  agriculture  adopting  and adoption  and soil organic  carbon  so we 
need  to identify  the locally  appropriate  crop rotations,  management  and equipment  to deal 
with agronomic  challenges.  
Then  we need  to identify and remove  the social,  cultural  and institutional barriers  to uptake  
these  conservation agriculture  practices.  We should also improve  the system  profitability  and 
removal  of structural  barriers  to production.  And finally,  we should ensure  that there is 
availability  and supply of balance plan nutrition.  So, these  are the overall  benefits,  which  you 
can harness  from  adopting the conservation agriculture.  So, guys,  this makes  the end of the 
Lecture Number  59. (Refer  Slide  Time:  25:18)  
 
 
These  are the references  which  I have  used for this lecture and please go through  these  for 
more  knowledge  on conservation  agricultural  impacts  on soil physical  properties.  So, let us 
wrap  up this lecture and let us meet  in our Lecture Number  60 to discuss some  other  issues of 
agricultural  productivity and environmental  issues.  Thank you. 