Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Agriculture  and Food  Engin eering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture:  57 
Agriculture  Productivity  and Environmental  Quality  (Contd.)  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:17)  
 
Welcome  friends  to this second  lecture  of week  12 of NPTEL  online  certification  course  of 
Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers . And in this lecture , lecture  number  57, we are going  to cover  
another  aspect  of environmental  quality  which  is related  to agricultural  product ivity and plant  
nutrition.   
In our previous  lecture,  we have  discussed  in details  about soil carbon  sequestration,  
however,  in this lecture  we are going  to discuss  the pollution  which  environmental  pollution  
which  are resulting  from  the synthetic  chemical  fertilizer  application.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  01:07) 
 
So, these  are the concepts  which  we are going  to cover  in this lecture.  So global  scenario  of 
fertilizer  consumption  and then problem  due to excessive  use of chemical  fertilizer , then 
alternative  of chem ical fertilizer , then inhibition  of nitrous  oxide  emission  after use of 
different  nitrification  and urease  inhibitors  and improvement  of fertilizer  application  
efficiency  against  fertilizer  pollution.  So these  are the concepts  which  we are going to discuss  
in this lecture.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:35) 
 
And these  are the five keywords  for this lecture , fertilizer  pollution , eutrophication,  Blue  
baby  syndrome , nitrous  oxide  emission , and fertilizer  application  efficiency.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  01:49) 
 
Now , if I see the global  scenario  of fertilizer  consumption  these  gives  us the trend  in 
consumption  of chemical  fertilizer  in India.  So this first graph  gives  us the fertilizer  
consumption  trend  in India  and this shows  the global  consumption  of fertilizer . So if you see 
from  2015  to 2021  the consumption  of fertilizer  urea in lakh metric  ton has increased.  
Similarly,  consumption  of DAP , MOP  and DAP  is also increased , MOP  has increase d and 
also but increase  of MOP  is not that prominent  however,  the NPKS  of fertilizer  have also 
increased .  
And if we see that global  consumption  of agriculture  fertilizer  by nutrient  from  2013  to 2018  
we can also see that nitrogen  has increase  and also the consumption  in million  metric  tons, so 
we can see that the nitrogen  was used in 2013 , so this is 2014  and this is 2018.  So from  2013  
to 2018  we can see the nitrogen  consumption  in million  metric  tons changed  from  111.3 
million  metric  tons to 119.5 million  metric  tons. 
So also you can see there  has been  an increase  in phosphorus  pentoxide  consumption  from  
41.8 million  metric  ton to 45.9 million  metric  ton. Similarly,  for potash  also we can see from  
29.7 million  metric  tons to 34 million  metric  tons increase  in from  2013  to 2018.  And if you 
see the total increase  global  consumption  of fertiliz er you can see 182.8 million  metric  tons to 
199.4 million  metric  tons. So there  has been  a continuous  increase  in all the fertilizer s 
globally  as well as in India.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  04:23) 
 
Now , if we see the simultaneously  the crop production  scenario  in million  tons. So the crop 
production , the Foodgrain  production  in India  in 2005 -06 was around  208.6 million  tons 
whereas,  in 1920  according  to the third  advance measurement  it gives  295.6 7 million  tons.  So 
if we see the fertilizer  consumption  trade  and food grain  productivity,  if we plot them  side by 
side one thing  is clear  that there  has been  a disproportionate  increase  in fertilizer  consumption  
and there  has not been  any drastic  change  in the productivity , foodgrain  productivity  with the 
fertilizer  consumption,  increase  in fertilizer  consumption.   
So that shows  that increase  in fertilizer  consumption  somehow  is not affecting  the increase  in 
foodgrain productivity.  So that means  it can have  a negative  impact  on foodgrain  
productivity.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  05:53)  
Now , what  is the problem  due to excessive  use of chemical  fertilizer ? Now , intensive  
fertilizer  application  causes  serious  environmental  problems  like eutrophication  of water,  loss 
of biodiversity , global  warming  and stratospheric  ozone  depletion , soil and plant  health  
problems.  So these  are the problems  which  are related  to excessive  use of chemical  fertilizer  
and fertilizer  also contains  heavy  metals  which  enter  into the food chain  via soil. So thus,  
fertilization  leads  to water,  soil and air pollution.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  06:32) 
 
Now , this shows  the impact  of inorganic  and organic  fertilizer s and their contaminants  in soil 
surface  and groundwater  you can see that different  contaminants  can not only infiltrate  into 
soil but also they can go to the water  body  and then they can they can create  the environmental  pollution.  So these  pollution  can occur  from  different  fertilizer  elements  like 
NPK  it can occur  to, these  pollutions  can also occur  from  heavy  metals, coliforms  and so on. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  07:18) 
 
Now , if you see the fertilizer  consumption  in India,  on average  India  consumed  about  500 
lakh metric  ton of fertilizer  per year in the last 10 years.  Now  as per the data shared  by the 
government  in Rajya  Sabha,  urea is the most  consumed  fertilizer  with around  300 lakh metric  
ton being  consumed  each year according , accounting  for 55 to 60 percent  of the chemical  
fertilizer  consumption  in the country.   
So urea accounts  for the majority  of the fertilizer s consumed  in India . Between 2016  to 17 
and 2019  to 20, there has been a steady  increase  in the consumption  of urea,  DAP  and NPK’s  
as we have  seen and the data for 2020 -21 is provisional  is and is available  up to February  
2021.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  08:22) 
 
Now  Bihar,  which  is a state of India  topped  the list in 2019 -20 with respect  to the per hectare  
consumption  of fertilizer , closely  followed  by Puducherry  in spite  of its small  size, and also 
Punjab,  Haryana  and Telangana  are among  the top five states  or union  territories,  which  have  
all reported  consum ption  of more  than 200 kg per hectare  in 2019 -20. So these  five states  or 
union  territories  have  also consistently  reported  consumption  of more  than 200 kg per hectare  
in the five year period  from  2015 -16 to 2019 -20. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  09:08) 
 
Now  let us see what  are the reasons  for fertilizer  overus e in India , there  are couple  of reasons . 
First of all, there  are no restrictions  currently  on who can buy the subsidized  fertilizer  or on 
how much  they can buy. So there  is no restriction.  So this has led to the overuse  of fertilizer s in cultivation  and also to the diversion  of urea to other  industries.  So the people  buy these  
subsidies  urea and they use it in other  industries  like dairy,  textile , paint, fisheries,  etc. 
Secondly,  a bulk of the subsidy  is given  in the form  of urea,  which  makes  up 70 percent  of 
the fertilizer s used in India.  So there  is a rampant  overuse  of urea and which  creates  the 
imbalance  in the consumption  of fertilizer  and ultimately  this imbalance  in the consumption  
of fertilizer  has led a worse  had led a worsening  of soil quality  that has resulted  in falling  
crop response  to fertilizer  which  in turn has adversely  impacted  farm  productivity  and 
farmers  profitability,  we have  discussed  what  is the bad impact  of imbalance  fertilizations .  
So basically,  due to the overuse  of urea,  there  is an imbalance  fertilizations  and ultimately,  
that creates  the negative  impact  on the farm  productivit y as well as the profitability.  Thirdly,  
the unawareness  among  the farmers  about  the effect  of overuse  of the chemical  fertilizer  is 
another  reason  for fertilizer  overuse.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:47 ) 
 
Now , we know  that nitrogenous  fertilizer  causes  pollution  because  nitrate  pollution  of 
groundwater  occurs  through  leaching  and the major  negative  effects  of intensiv e nitrogen  
fertilizer  uses eutrophication . And the primary  and the acute  toxic  effect  of nitrate  
concentrations  in drinking  water  found  to above  50 milligram  nitrate  per liter, which  causes  
inflammation  in digestive  and urinary  system  for adults .  
And secondary  toxicity  of high nitrate  drinking  water  causes  methamoglobinemia  or blue 
baby  syndrome . So ammonia  volatilization  also creates  acid rain and acidity  in soil favours  formation  of ammonium  sulphate  then leaching  and then nitrous  emission  aids in global  air 
global  warming.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:41 ) 
 
So we can see here blue baby  syndrome  then eutrophication  and also the nitrous  oxide  
emission  from  different  anthropogenic  activities  in the industrial  areas  as well as from  the 
fertilizer  overuse.  So these  nitrogenous  fertilizer  is another  reason  for your nitrous  oxide  
emission.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:00 ) 
 
Now , another  important  thing  is eutrophication,  what  is eutrophication ? Eutrophication  is the 
consequence  of hyper  fertilizations  of water  through  nutrien t which  are basically  nitrogen  and phosphorus  and it is a type of dystrophic ation  or ecological  imbalance.  So what  happens  
when  there  is huge  amount  of nitrogen  and phosphorus  goes to the water  that will create  the 
algal  bloom.  
So these  algal  bloom  when  this algae  will die, they will their body  will be decayed  using  the 
dissolved  oxygen  and this dissolved  oxygen  will be depleted,  thereby  negatively  impacting  
the health  of the all the water  organisms.  So water  borne  organisms , so ultimately  they will 
die.  
So the fish and other  animals  or organisms  which  are there  in the water  will die eventually.  
So this is called  eutrophication.  So these  eutrophication  creates  increas e in algal  biomass  and 
deoxygenation  of the water  column  and heterotrophic  mineralization  of the organic  matter  
produced . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:10 ) 
 
Another  one problem  is heavy  metal  contamination.  So research  projects  implemented  in the 
rural  area of European  Union  demonstrated  that phosphorus  fertilizer  contain  on average,  13 
milligram  of cadmium , 60 milligram  of chromium , and then 26 milligram  of copper , 30 
milligram  of lead and 236 milligram s zinc per one kg of fertilizer . And this accumulation  of 
heavy  metals  such as arsenic,  cadmium,  chromium,  mercury,  nickel , lead,  enter  into the 
human  body through  food and feed and cause  a health  problem.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:50 ) 
 
So we can see some  examples  are given  due to the arsenic  pollution  Black  Foot disease  you 
can see. In case of cadmium  pollution,  Itai Itai disease  is there . In case of lead pollution,  we 
can see Dislexia  in among  children  and then using  an in case of a mercury  pollution  we can 
see the Minamata  disease  can occur.   
So these  are different  types  of human  health  hazards  which  occurred  due to these  heavy  metal  
pollution  but these  heavy  metals  also can come  through  fertilizer  overuse . So synthetic  
fertilizer , chemical  fertilizer  overuse  can also create  these  different  heavy  metal  pollution.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:30 ) 
 So it is only the gloomy  picture.  So we need  to think  about  in solution  and remediation  for 
these  negative  impacts  from  synthetic  fertilizer  application.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:43 ) 
 
So what  are the solution?  There  are several  solutions  and those  solution  we have  already  
discussed  in details  in our previous  lectures.  So biofertilizer  instead  of only using  the 
chemical  fertilizer , we can use a conjoint  use of other  chemicals  along  with the chemical  
fertilizer  or organic  matter .  
So we can add biofertilizer , we can add slow  release  or controlled  release  fertilizer , we can 
use nitrification  inhibitor , we can use urease  inhibitor,  we can use nano  fertilizer , we can use 
organic  manure  and also we need  to increase  the awareness  among  the farmer  and also we 
need  to increase  the application  efficiency  of the fertilizer s. (Refer  Slide Time:  15:28 ) 
 
So biofertilizer  we have  already  discussed . So we know  that biofertilizer  differ  from  chemical  
and organic  fertilizer  in the sense  that they do not directly  supply  any nutrients  to crops  and 
they are basically  cultures  of special  bacteri a and fungi.  So these  bio fertilizers  are 
environmental  friendly  ecofriendly  and they can be very efficient  as far as the plant  nutrition  
is concerned.  So we can apply  this biofertilizer  to enhance  the nutrient  mobility  as well as the 
nutrition  I mean  the nutrition  status  of the soil, thereby  increasing  or augmenting  the plant  
health.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:09 ) 
 
Also  we can apply  the slow  and controlled  release  fertilizer , we have  discussed  these  in 
details,  so I am not going  to discuss  them  again.  However,  let me just go through  very quickly.  So organic  nitrogen,  organic  nitrogen  is low or low solubility  compounds  we can see 
urea formaldehyde  and then IBDU  or isobutylene  diurea  we can use.  
We can use coated  fertilizer  like sulphur  coated  fertilizer , polyme r coated  fertilizer , we can 
use different  types  of inorganic  low solubility  compounds  like magnesium , ammonium , 
phosphate  or partially  acidulated  phosphate  rock.  So these  can be used for work  as a nutrient  
source,  so that they can manage  the nutrient  relea se and thereby  reduce  the negative  impact  of 
rampant  synthetic  chemical  fertilizer  and use. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:07 ) 
 
 
Also we can see this graph  shows  the ammonia  losses  from  a surface  applied  urea and ESN.  
So you can see that this is also a controlled  release  fertilizer . So these  contribution  of these  
controlled  release  fertilizer  and nitrification  inhibitors.  So you can see when  we add using  urea there  has been  an increase  in nitrogen  volatilization , however,  with the application  of 
ESN  that can reduc e the nitro gen volatilization .  
So contribution  of controlled  release  fertilizer  and nitrification  inhibitors  to air and water  
quality  conservation  are significant  due to greater  nutrient  use efficiency  and reduce  nitrogen  
fertilizations  rates.  
(Refer  Slide Time:  17:51 ) 
 
So also we can see use of nitrification  inhibitors.  So nitrification  inhibitors  are added  to 
nitrogenous  fertilizer s and applied  to the soil and it delays  the transformation  of ammonium  
to nitrite  by inhibiting  or slowing  the action  of Nitrosomonas.  So you can see nitrapyrin  with 
spring  applied  urea reduced  nitrate  leaching  by 30 percent  we can see from  here.  So when  we 
are applying  the nitrapyrin  with urea that can reduce  the nitrate  leaching . (Refer  Slide  Time:  18:23 ) 
 
And also there  has been  an inhibition  of nitrous  emission  after the use of different  
nitrification  inhibitors  you can see when  nitrapyrin  is applied  with ammonium  sulphate  in 
that can reduce  the nitrous  oxide  emission  by 93 percent  for 30 days incubation  periods . So 
we can see for different  combination,  how these  nitrification  inhibitor  can help in reduce  
nitrous  oxide  emission . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:53 ) 
 
Urease  inhibitor , we know  that urease  inhibitors  prevents  or suppress  the transformation  of 
amide -nitrogen  in urea to ammonium  hydroxide  and ammonium  by suppressing  the 
hydrolytic  action  of the enzyme  urease.  And then it acts by slowing  down  the volatilization  
losses  of ammonia  to the air as well as further  leaching  losses  of nitrate .  And it also increases  the efficiency  of urea nitrogen  fertilizer s containing  urea,  like urea 
ammonium  nitrate  and adverse  environmental  impact  is decreased.  So you can see these  
urease  inhibitor  has played  an important  role in reducing  the loss of nitrogen  through  
volatilization  process.  
(Refer Slide  Time:  19:34 ) 
 
We can see the case study , one case study  where  ammonia  loss due to volatilization  following  
surface  application  of urea and percentage  reduction  of loss due to the addition  of NBP T 
which  is a urease  inhibitor.  So you can see that for different  crops,  when  we are applying  the 
urea,  so this is an ammonia  volatilization . So ammonia  volatilization  has drastically  reduced  
when  applied  through  an urease  inhibitor.   
So Cantarella  et al. in 2018  measure  the reduction  in ammonia  volatilizati on of 30 to 90 
percent  through  the addition  of these  NBPT to urea in Brazil . So that shows  the importance  of 
this type of conjoint  use of chemical  and chemical  fertilizer  to increase  the efficiency  of 
different  nutrients  specificall y nitrogen.  (Refer  Slide Time:  20:26 ) 
 
Nanofertilizer  are also very important.  So nano fertilizer  are synthesised  or modified  form  of 
traditional  fertilizer , fertilizer  bulk material  or extracted  from  different  vegetative  or 
reproductive  parts  of the plant,  by different  chemical  physical,  mechanical  or biological  
methods  with the help of nanotechnology  used to and also they used to improve  the soil 
fertility,  productivity  and quality  of agricultural  produce.   
So nano -TiO2  or nano -titanium  oxide  treated  seed product  plant record ed more  dry weight  
and higher  photosynthetic  rate and chlorophyll  a formation  compared  to the control . You can 
see here nano  chelated  iron which  contains  7 percent  nitrogen  and also you can still see nano  
chelated  NPK  with a grade  of 2020 . So there  are diffe rent types  of nano  fertilizer  available  
which  can show  higher  nutrient  use efficiency.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  21:22 ) 
 
You can see here when  urea is mixed  with montmorillonite  and polymer  and water  we can 
create  different -different  fertilizer  granules  and these granules  were  used and they showed  a 
tremendous  decrease  in nitrogen  release  through  nitrous  oxide  emission.  So that shows  the 
importance  of different  management  adjustment  which  are required  for reducing  the loss of 
nutrients  and also increasing  the fertilizer , your nutrient  use efficiency . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:58 ) 
 
Organic  manure  we know  we have  discussed  in details . Organic  manure  coupled  with 
synthetic  fertilizer  can help in integrated  nutrient  management  and it can improve  and sustain  
the soil fertility  and crop production . Then the sole application  of mineral  or organic  
fertilizer , organic  mineral  fertilizer  or organic  manure  and in manure  application  also improves  the soil characteristics , improve  nutrient  uptake  and crop production  towards  
susta inable  environment.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:26 ) 
 
We know  the different  types  of sources  of organic  manure  and when  we apply  these  organic  
manure  that can impact  the soil fertility  positively . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:35)  
 
Vermicompost  we know  that globally  earthworm  may play an important  business  for the 
conversion  of organic  waste  into useful  nutrients . So vermicompost  has excellent  potential  
for its application  on diverse  field crops . And application  of vermicompost  stimulates  soil microbial  activity.  So these are the composted  materials  when  you apply  them  in the soil they 
acts as a carbon  rich substrate  for the microorganis ms. 
So the microbial  activity  increases  which  helps  in the mineralization  of the plant  nutrients  and 
improve  the soil fertility  and quality in the crop production  system.  Remember  that 
application  of vermicompost  improved  soil aeration , water  holding  capacity  and availability  
of the nutrients . And farmyard  manure,  so the production  of farmyard  manure  can easily  be 
done  at the farm  level  we have  discussed  that already  and thus exhibit  good  potential  for its 
usage as an organic  source . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  23:32 ) 
 
Application  efficiency  we know  that we have already  discussed  this slide  previously  in our 
lectures.  So application  of any fertiliz er should  be done  at an economic  rate in using  that 4-R 
concept  which  we have  already  discussed.  And this is an ideal  fight  for we know  that the this 
is basically  the nutrient  in case of ideal  fertilizer , the nutrient  release  should  be synchronized  
with the crops  nutrient  requirement.   
So we can see with the passage  of time we are applying  the fertilizer  at the beginning,  but the 
yield  should  have  the nutrient  uptake  and nutrient  release  from  fertilizer  should  go side by 
side. So the nutrient  release  patter n should  match  exactly  the nutrient  uptake  curve  of the 
crop,  any excess  nutrient  shall  remain  in the soil for the next crop.  So this should  be an ideal  
condition.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  24:31 ) 
 
So our strategy  can be several  split nitrogen  application  we have also discussed  that. So split 
nitrogen  application  can be a strategy  to manage  that to satisfy  the nutrient  uptake  at different  
stages  of the growth.  So these  different  practices  of application , of manure,  application  of 
nitrification  inhibitor , applica tion of urease  inhibitor , and then split application  of fertilizer  
can help in reducing  the negative  impact  of all these  excess  fertilizer  use and that can 
maintain  or sustain  the ecological  functions  and also they can reduce  the environmental  
pollutions.  So these  are very important . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:24 ) 
 
And summary  we can see that fertilizer  application  is very vital for today's  agricultural  crop 
production  system  as it restores  the soil nutrient  and promotes  crop growth  and yield . And to reduce  the hazard  of excessive  use of fertilizer  judicious  and sustainable  application  through  
soil testing  and analysis  is topmost  priority .  
And also to eliminate  the pollution , hazards  and to enhance  (())(25:48 ) and sustain  the 
agriculture  production  and to safeg uard the environment.  We need these  integrated  use of 
different  types  of nutrients,  supplements  such as chemical  fertilizer , organic  manures , 
biofertilizer  and slow  released  controlled  release  fertilizer s.  
So these  points  basically  summarizes  whatever  we have  discussed  in this lecture  and just 
remember  that these  strategies  are very much  important  for countries  like India  to improve  
not only the productivity,  farm  productivity,  but also to improve  the profitability  of the 
farmers.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  26:37 ) 26:40  missing  
  
 
So guys,  these  are the references  which  I have  used for this lecture.  So please  go through  
these  differences  if you want  to have  more  comprehensive  knowledge.  And thank  you let us 
meet  in our next lecture  to discuss  other  environmental  issues  which  are related  to 
agricultural  production  and fertilizer  use. Thank  you.  