Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Agriculture and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture:  58 
Agriculture Productivity  and Environmental  Quality  (Contd.)  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:17)  
 
Welcome friends  to this 58th lecture of NPT EL online  certification  course  of Soil Fertility  
and Fertilizers . We are at currently  week 12 lecture.  So in this week  our topic  is agricultural  
productivity and environmental  quality.  In different  lectures  of this week,  we are discussing  
some  of the broader  environmental  impacts  of agricultural  practices  and how we can mitigate  
some  of the deleterious  or hazardous  impacts  of agricultural  practices.   
So in a previous  two lectures,  we have  discussed  about  carbon  sequestrati on and how 
agricultural  practices  are linked with carbon  sequestration.  And another  lecture we have  
devoted for discussing  the fertilizer  based  environmental  problems,  eutrophication and how 
we can control  those  problems  using alternate sources  of plant  nutrients  like bio fertilizers , 
manures  and so on. 
So in those  previous  two lectures,  you have  seen the discussion  on carbon  sequestration  and 
fertilizer  based  environmental  problem.  Now in this lecture number  58, we are going  to focus  
on another  very important  environmental  problem,  which  is related  to agricultural  practices  
specifically  in Indian condition.  So we are going to discuss stubble  burning and its impacts  on 
soil and other  environmental  properties.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  02:16)  
 
So these  are the concepts  which  we are going to cover  in this lecture.  First of all, we are 
going to discuss about  crop residue  generation  in India.  Then  we are going  to discuss stubble  
burning and how the stubble  burning is impacting  the environment  we are also going to 
discuss. Then effects  of stubble  burning on agriculture  productivity we are going to also 
discuss,  and then we are going,  we will try to find some  alternative  solution  to stubble  
burning so that the health  hazard s which  are linked  with stubble  burning can be reduced.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  03:00)  
 
Now,  these  are some  of the keywords  for this lecture crop residue,  stubble  burning , combine  
harvester , happy cedar  and crop residue  management , which  we are going  to discuss in this 
lecture.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  03:10)  
 
So let us discuss what  is stubble  burning and why it is very important  at environmental  
problem  in India . The crop residue  is the material  which  is left after harvesting of crop and 
byproduct  of agriculture  based  industry.  So whenever  we harvest  the crop the stubbles  for 
example,  in case of rice and wheat,  the stubbles  which  is left in the field are known  as crops , 
these  are several  these  are crop residues.   
Now the removal  of crop residue  leads  to low soil fertility  and thereby decrease crop 
production.  And the straw  of most  cereal  crop contains  about  35 to 10 and 80 percent  of the 
total N, P, K taken  up by the crop.  So these  are very important  consideration to understand  
the impact  of stubble  burning.  Remember  that the straw  of the most  cereal  crop contains  
about  35, 10 and 80 percent  of the total N, P, K taken  up by the crop.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  04:25)  
 
Now if we see the crop residue  generation  in India , the scenario  of crop residue  generation  in 
India,  here we can see that cereals  accounts  for 58 percent  of the total crop residue  generated  
in India , fibers  accounts  for 20 percent , then oil seed accounts  for 5 percent , and sugarcane  
accounts  for 17 percent . So these  are, this is the distribution of crop or crop wise crop residue  
generation  in India .  
And then if we see that contribution  of different  cereal  crops  because cereal  crop as you can 
see here,  it accounts  for majority  of the crop residue.  Now if we see within  the cereal  also,  
rice accounts  for 53 percent  of the residue,  whereas  wheat  accounts  for 33 percent  of the 
generated  residue , maize account  for 7 percent , whereas  millets  accounted  for 7 percent . So 
these  are the contribution  of different  cereal crop in residue  generation.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  05:32)  
 
Now what  is stubble  burning?  Now stubble  burning is setting  up fire in the harvested  crop 
fields  to clear  the excess  crop residues  to prepare the field for sowing of next crop.  So this is 
called  stubble  burning.  What people  do say basically  the farmers ? They setup  the fire in the 
harvested  crop fields after harvesting the crop to clear  the excess  of the crop residues  to 
prepare the field for sowing of the next crop,  so that is called  stubble  burning.  
Now in India  on an average 84 percent  stubble  burning incidents  are recorded  in Punjab.  So 
Punjab accounts  for the majority  of the stubble  burning incidents  in India.  So if you see the 
distribution  of contribution  from  different  states,  we can see Punjab  accounts  for 84 percent  
whereas,  Haryana accounts  only 5 percent , Jharkhand accounts  for 3 percent  whereas, Odisha  
accounts  for only 1.4 percent  and rest of the India  accounts  for 6 percent . So if you consider  
the total burning incidence of 10,671 the data we have  seen the 84 percent  of this stubble  
burning occurs  in Punjab.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  06:54)  
 
Now this is the picture  of stubble  burning where you can see farmers  are burning the straw  
which  are left in the field after the harvest  and this is a very common  practice  after the rice 
harvest.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  07:16)  
 
Now,  you can see the occurrence of temporal  variation  of occurrence of stubble  burning in 
Punjab.  So you can see in during the May the most  occurrence of stubble  burning appears  
here in Punjab region , and then this is June and July the incidence of stubble  burning 
considerably goes down and then in August  almost  negligible  and then from  September  
onwards  up to October  again  stubble  burning is increasing.  So that shows  the temporal  variation  and of course,  this temporal  variation  of stubble  burning matches  with the crop the 
timing  of the growing  different  successive  crops.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  08:04)  
 
Now,  the question comes  to our mind  why do farmers  burns  stubble?  This is the most  
important  question where we will discuss stubble  burning,  and if we want  to, if we want  to 
address  the problem  of stubble  burning,  we have to understand why do farmers  burn 
stubbles?   
Because in case of Punjab  they have very short  time between  rice harvesting  and sowing  of 
wheat.  So the time gap between  Rabi planting  and Kharif  harvesting  is between  2 to 3 weeks.  
So during  the Kharif  harvesting  of rice crop and successive  planting of Rabi  crops  that is 
wheat,  the time gap is very limited,  which  is only 2 to 3 weeks.  
Now,  during this time farmer clear  the fields  and ready  them  for winter  wheat  crops.  So 
whatever  they have  to do, they have  to complete  all the operation within  this 2 to 3 weeks.  
However,  if there is a delay  in sowing that is the major  reason  effective wheat  crop growth  
and yield . They cannot  delay  the sowing of wheat  crop,  because if they delay  the sowin g of 
the wheat  crop that will affect  the wheat  crop growth  and yield.  
So and also remember  that Punjab generated  nearly  16 million  tons of paddy residue  in 
Kharif  2021.  So that shows  clearly  that since  the time gap between  the Kharif  harvesting and 
the planting of the successive  wheat  crop is very short,  and farmers  has to clear  the field 
before  the planting  of the wheat  crop they get very short  amount  of time to complete  all these  operations . And as a result  the burning  of the stubble  becomes  one of the feasible  options  to 
the stem.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:12)  
 
So as a result,  what  happens  instead  of carrying  and disposing the stubble  from  the field and 
spending money on management  of this residue,  they just set it on fire and thereby  destroying 
whatever  standing residue  are there after the harvest.  So that becomes  an economic  solution  
for the farmers  to clear  their field within  a very short  period of time.  So that they do not delay  
the sowing of the successive  crop.  Now if you see the stubble  burning  from  NASA's  Earth  
Observatory,  you can see that it is a data of October  30 2014.  Now you can see the 
occurrence of stubble  burning in Punjab region of India.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:08)  
 Now,  we can see that the major  crop, one of the major  variety  which  is grown  in Punjab  is 
Pusa  44. Now this Pusa  44 variety  is a 130 day crop. So the duration  of this crop is 130 days.  
Now long gestation  period gives  short  window  for wheat  growing.  So since  this Pusa  44 has a 
long gestation  period,  it allows  for very short  window  for wheat  sowing.  Now  in 2019  total 
area under  paddy was 77 lakh acre in Punjab and under  Pusa  44 out of the 77, 13 lakh acre 
were under  this Pusa 44 variety.  
And remember  that this Pusa  44 leaves  more  crop residues  than other  varieties . Now  it 
produces  7 to 8 tons stubble  in one hectare,  while  other  varieties  produce  5 to 6 times.  So it 
yields  4 to 5 quintal  more  than other  rice varieties.  So you can see here this is, this is the year 
wise data from  2016 to 2020- 21 you can see area sown under  non-basmati  varieties  you can 
see that Pusa  44 accounts  for the majority .  
Although the share  of the area covered  under  Pusa  44 has gradually  declined  in recent  time 
however,  you see that as compared  to the other  varieties  it is still dominating , and that is why 
they produce  huge  amount  of stubble  and thereby  encouraging the farmers  to destroy  the 
stubble  by burning  them  in the field.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:12)  
 
Now,  there is a instrument  called  combine  harvester.  So combine  harvester  is being used in 
the field for harve sting  of the crop.  And if we see the average size of landholding in Punjab 
and Haryana that is in Punjab it is 3.62 hectare, whereas  in case of Haryana is 2.22 hectare.  
Now,  Punjab government  gives  subsidy to rupees  3 lakh to 4 lakhs , so of course,  for to harvest  the in this huge  field you need  to have  kind of instruments  or machines  to be operated  
in the field.   
So Punjab  government  gives  subsidy of rupees  3 lakh to 4 lakh, so farmers  can harvest  
quickly and get time for preparation  for the next also. So they all use this combined  harvester  
to harvest  the crop so that they can harvest  the crop very quick  and get the enough  time for 
preparation  for the next crop.  Now,  the combine  harvester  leaves  behind 8 to 12 inches  of 
paddy stock  on the field.  So that creates  the issues of stubble  burning.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:30)  
 
Now,  another  reason  is less crop diversification.  Now Punjab  missed  its crop diversification  
target  in Kharif  2021  leading  to enormous  paddy residue  generation.  And as we have seen,  
the majority of the area comes  under  Pusa 44 varieties , so the diversification  is less as a result  
the generation  of residue  is huge.   
Now farmers  of Punjab  and Haryana  do not follow  crop diversification  because of adequate 
fertile  land.  So they do not need  to follo w this crop diversification  because they have  
adequate amount  of fertile  land and farmers  get good price for rice and wheat  because they 
sell to the government  at minimum supported  price.  
So, minimum  support  price of paddy and wheat  is 1940 and 2015 per square per quintal  
respectively  for Paddy  and wheat . And the maximum  procurement  of rice and wheat  is done  
from  these  two states , from  Punjab and Haryana.  So these  are the reasons  for less crop 
diversification  and when  there is a less crop diversification,  majority  of the area will come under  Pusa 44 which  is a residue  generating  variety  and as a result  there  will be incidents  of 
stubble  burning.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:56)  
 
And also these  rice straw  which  are left in the field and not very popular  animal  feed also 
because rice straw  has high silica  and lignin  content  and low crude  protein content.  So if the 
stubble  is used as fodder,  it impacts  the quality  of the milk also, because the calcium  content  
can be decreased  by up to 2 percent .  
So you can see that these rise straw  cannot be alternatively  used as a popular  animal  feed 
because of these  two reasons.  And of course,  high fuel cost is another  big reason  for stubble  
burning.  So the happy  seeder  and the super  seeder are tractor  towed  implements.  So the fuel 
consumption of happy seeder  is 16 liters  of diesel  per hectare and super  seeder  consumed 22 
liter of diesel  per hectare,  that is 9 liter per acre and price of diesel  is quite  high right  now.  
So these  are some  of the reason  for which  encourage the farmers  to burn their stubble  as a 
lucrative  option for residue  management  or economic option I would say, it is an economic  
option to them  for residue  management.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  17:19)  
 
Now,  what  are the harmful  effects  of stubble  burning?  We can see first of all, there will be 
nutrient  loss of course,  we are burning  the stubble , so that means  we are losing  the nutrients  
which  are there  in the residue . Secondly,  when  we are burning  this residue,  there  is depth  of 
beneficial  soil flora  and fauna,  so this is another  important  impact  of stubble  burning . Then 
reducti on in agricultural  productivity of course,  the stubble  burning  will harmfully  affect  and 
reduce the agricultural  productivity.  So this reduction in agricultural  productivity  is another  
major  impact  of stubble  burning.  
Then production of greenhouse  gases,  huge  amount  of greenhouse  gases  are produced  as a 
result  of this harmful  stubble  burning . And deterioration  of air quality  is another  this is a 
major  environmental  impact  deterioration  of the air quali ty the recently  for last couple  of 
decades,  the air quality  of New  Delhi  and nearby  places  have been  polluted,  I mean  the air 
quality  scenario  in this region  has been  declining since  last couple  of decades  and the 
situation  becomes  worse  during  the winter  months,  because of stubble  burning , because  
before  the winter  planting  of it the farmers  of Punjab  they burn the stubble  and as a result,  
during the winter  months,  there  is a huge  deterioration  of the air quality  in New  Delhi  and 
nearby  places.  Also,  you can see reduction in visibility  due to the air pollution and that causes  
human health  hazards  also. So these  are all harm ful effects  of stubble  burning.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  19:24)  
 
If you see the deterioration  of soil health,  of course,  stubble  burning results in 98 to 100 
percent  loss of nitrogen and 70 to 90 percent  loss of sulphur  and then 20 to 40 percent  loss of 
phosphorus  and potassium.  Now  one ton of stubble  burning  generates  a loss of 5.5 kg of 
nitrogen,  2.3 kg of phosphate , 25 kg of potassium  and then more  than 1 Kg of Sulphur  from  
the soil. So these  are the detrimental  effects  of stubble  burning,  one of the detrimen tal effects  
of stubble  burning.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:07)  
 
If you see the comparison of N, P, K and organic  matter  of soil samples  of Punjab,  collected  
pre and post in situ rice crop residue  burning,  you can clearly  see that after the burning  of the 
residues,  the nitrogen  as well as phosphate  and these  two important  nutrients  are reduced  as compared  to the pre burning  scenario  however,  potassium  has increased.  So that shows  the 
impact  on nutrient loss by stubble  burning.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:46)  
 
Of course,  the government  agency  system  of air quality  and weather  forecasting  research  that 
is SAFAR  in their findings  have  indicated  the direct impact  of stubble  burning in 
deteriorating  Delhi's  air quality , we know  that because this stubble  burning  one ton of stubble  
on burning  releases  2 Kg of Sulphur  dioxide,  3 kg of particulate  matter , 60 kg of Carbon 
Monoxide , 1460 kg of carbon  dioxide , and 199 kg of ash.  
So all these  are very much  harmful  for environmental  quality  as well as human  health  and 
that is why the air quality  has been  drastically  reduce.  I mean , we have  seen that the air 
quality  of Delhi  and nearby  places  have  been  deterioratin g for last couple  of decad es due to 
this stubble  burning.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  21:55)  
 
Of course,  you can also see during  this winter  months  the Diwali  one of the major  festival  in 
India  burning  of firecrackers  also aggravate  the air quality  deterioration  apart  from  the 
stubble  burning.  So according  to the data from  CPCB central  pollution control  board . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:17)  
 
Now if you see what  are the other  effects  on agricultural  productivity we know  that loss of 
nutrients  from  soil and release of and release of pollutants  due to stubble  burning have  
detrimental effects  on agricultural  productivity , and these  NOx  gases  or nitro gen oxide  gases  
can damage plant  tissue  and then sulphur  dioxide  and nitro gen oxide  gases  can cause acid 
rain, because once  they produce  they go to the atmosphere  and mix there  with the air water  vapour  and then they produce  the sulfuric  acid and nitric  acid and come back  in the form  of 
rain.  
So that is an although this acid rain is it is a localized  event  but that also impact  the 
environment.  So this is one of the harmful  impact  on agricultural  productivity . Then 
prolonged exposure  to particulate  matter  causes  necrosis  of the crops  also. And then volatile  
organic  compounds  and nitrogen oxides  affect plant  metabolism.  So these  are the harmful  
effects  on agricultural  productivity.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  23:28)  
 
Then  of course  deterioration  of human  and animal  health  due to poor air quality like and then 
create asthma , acute respiratory  infection,  then eye watering , eye irritation , cough, lung 
cancer,  and the problem  of acute respirat ion infection  or respiratory  infection  is particularly  
increasing  in children  due to the high respiration  rate among children.  So these  are some  of 
the detrimental effects  on human  and animal  health  by the stubble  burning.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  24:06)  
 
Now at the end, let us discuss what  are the alternate solutions  to stubble  burning?  First of all, 
you can use happy seeder  and super  seeder,  we have already  discussed  about  happy seeder  
and super  seeder,  but this could,  these  are the possible  solution.  Of course,  you have  to keep  
in mind  the energy , the price of the energy  to run these  equipments.  So this happy seeder  and 
super  seeder  they can so which  seed even  in the presence of paddy residue . 
So and happy seeder has many  benefits  like increase yield,  reduce fertilizer  requirements , 
herbicide  requirement  and reduced  water  requirement  also. However,  at the same  time you 
should also make a cost benefit  analysis  by considering the energy  requirement  or fuel 
requi rement  to run this, to run this equipment .  
However,  these  happy seeder  and super  seeder  are having,  they are having some  beneficial  
properties  I would say they have  some  advantages  while  fighting against  this stubble  burning,  
because they can sow the seed in the presence of paddy residue.  So you do not need  to 
remove  those  residues  for growing the wheat  crop. (Refer  Slide  Time:  25:32)  
 
Then another  is called  the straw  management  system.  So it is an additional  equipment  
attached  with the combine  harvester  and it cut standing stubble  in small pieces  and spread on 
the soil surface.  And crop harvesting and straw  management  is done  in a single  operation.  So 
modified  combined harvester.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:53)  
 
Now if you see the effect  of crop residue  manag ement  for 7 years  in a rice wheat  rotation,  
which  was published in 2004,  we can see that organic  carbon  has been  declined  in due to 
stubble  burning,  available nitrogen  has been  also declined,  available phosphate  declined , 
available potassium  declined,  total nitrogen also declined , total phosphate  also declined  and 
then total potassium  also declined.  So you can see that incorporation  or proper  residue  management , crop residue  management  can enhance the fertility  status  of the soil as 
compared  to the soil where the stubble  burning  is practiced . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  26:45)  
 
There is another  latest  development  in stubble  management  that is the Pusa  decomposer,  Pusa 
decomposer  is the consortium  of fungal  strains  developed by Indian Agricultural  Research  
Institute  which  can accelerate decomposition of residue  including paddy  straw  into compost  
and these  are available in capsule form.  So they are very cheap , cost about  20 per packet  of 4 
capsules.  So you can use this for decomposi ng the, decomposing the residue.  
(Refer Slide  Time:  27:17)  
 And you can also use your crop residue  for compost  and biogas  preparation.  This is most  
attractive  and energy  efficient , nontoxic  and environmental  friendly pathway.  Compost  is 
used as organic  manure  to improve  the soil fertility , we have  already  discussed . Then biogas  
plant  slurry  can be also used as manure, and biogas  also can be used to produce  the energy . 
And you can also grow  short  duration  rice variety,  non-basmati  varieties  such as PR 121, PR 
122, 123, 124 and 126. 
(Refer  Slide Time:  27:57)  
 
You can also use this stubble  for biochar  production.  So biochar  we have  already  discussed  
which  is a carbon  rich porous  substance  obtained by pyrolysis  process.  And we know  that 
incorporation of biochar  can help in carbon  sequestration , it can also acts as a soil conditioner  
and also they can, it can also absorb soil pollutants.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  28:20)  
 
You can also use for biofuel  production.  So most  of the fossil  fuel requirement  of the country 
is made through  import.  And India’s  target “Energy  Independent  Nation ” by 2047.  So India’s  
target  is 20 percent  ethanol  blending in petrol  by 2025.  So agriculture  stubble  provides  an 
alternative  raw materials  for this biofuel,  or bioethanol  production.  And agriculture  stubble  if 
utilised  collectively  have  the potential  to fulfil  about  17 percent  of the total energy  demands  
in India.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  28:56)  
 
You can also use this stubble  for mushroom  cultivation,  paddy straw  can be used for 
conveniently for making mushroom  growing house  and it reduces  the cost of cultivation  also. 
So these are alternative  solutions.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  29:09)  
 
You can also use as a fodder , use straw  as fodder , and paddy  straw  uses a bedding  material  
for cattle  poultry  etc. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  29:18)  
 
And then you can of course  use this crop residues  for mulching which  can conserve  soil 
moisture.  Also  they can control  the weeds , minimize  soil erosion,  add organic  matter  into the 
soil and increase the soil crop productivity.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  29:35)  
 
So, summar ily we know  that burning of crop residues  including stubble  results  in huge  
monetary  loss as well as environmental  degradation.  So farmers  need  to be made  aware  about  
the available viable  alternatives  and also be informed about  the adverse effects  of crop 
residue  burning.   
Alternate  profitable  cropping  pattern  including  selection  of short  duration  rice varieties,  that 
will provide  a window  for the next wheat  crop needs  to be worked out. And budgetary 
allocation  for providing  monetary  incentives  to the farme rs alone  will not solve  the problem.  
So, these  are some  of the important  message  from  this lecture,  I hope  that you have  
understood the major  problem  of stubble  burning,  why farmers  burn the stubble  and what  are 
their impacts  and then how you can manage the stubble burning in alternative  ways,  so we 
have  discussed  them  all. (Refer  Slide  Time:  30:39)  
 
 
These are some  of the references  which  we have used for this for this lecture,  please go 
through this for more  knowledge  on stubble  burning and residue  management.  Let us meet  in 
our next lecture  to discu ss some  other  issues.  Thank you.  