Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 0 5 
Importance of Soil Nutrient Management and Basic Soil Plant Relationship  
Welcome friends to thi s fifth and final lecture of week one of NPTEL online certification course 
of Soil Fertility and Fertilizers . And in this week we are talking about importance of soil nutrient 
management and basic soil plant relationship .  
So in the p revious  lectures we ha ve discussed the basic concepts of plant nutrition we have 
discussed about  the essentiality criteria we have classified the nutrient based on their essentiality . 
And also we have seen some important rules we have seen the basic overview of plant  nutrition 
we have seen the soil fertility indicators .  
And also we have seen  we have discussed some important mechanisms of nutrient uptake by the 
plants like active transport passive transport . And also we have seen different types of the use of 
the carrier protein s. There are different types of active transport and also we have seen the 
contact exchange and their related theories .  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:38)  
 
So in this lecture we are going to discuss this following concept of  mechanistic model of nutrient 
uptake . We are also going to discuss the nutrient transformation in the soil we are going to discuss the carbon nitrogen ratio in soil organic matter , influence of ph in plant nutrition and 
finally we are going to discuss the dynamic soil plant nutrient relationsh ip.  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:00)  
 
So these are some of the major concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture . And these 
are some of the keywords in this lecture mineralization , immobilization , soil fertility and nutrient 
imbalance .  
(Refer Slide Ti me: 02:17)  
 So let us start with a Michaelis -Menten  kinetics . So it is basically in  it is a model which is 
generally  widely used in enzyme kinetics however for mechanistic models of nutrient uptake we 
are also  we generally we also use this Michaelis -Menten kinetics . But before that let us  first see 
what is M ichaelis -Menten kinetics .  
So this Michaelis -Menten  model basically takes the form of an equation describing the rate of 
enzymatic reactions by relating reaction rate which is denoted by v that is a rat e of formation of 
product which is denoted by this p and to s which is the concentration of a substrate s . So the 
equation shows the small v is basically d p by d t equal to v max multiplied by substrate by k m 
plus substrate so this k m is basically also known as the Michaelis -Menten kinetics .  
So graphically if we see in the x axis we are putting the substrate concentration in the y axis we 
are putting the reaction rate . So as the substrate concentration is increasing we are seeing the 
increase in the rea ction rate . And this midpoint is known as midpoint of this reaction r ate is 
known as half of v max and this is also known as the so  using this formula also we can we can 
express the nutrient uptake in the plant . And here k m stands for the Michaelis -Menten  
coefficient .  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:40)  
 
So based on this  equation , based on this relationship , so based on this relationship we can see 
that uptake  rate and  plant uptake rate and iron solution concentration can  on also be connected together.  So we can s ee here that in the x axis we are putting the ion concentration which we 
denote by c and the uptake which we generally indicate by I so the maximum take which is 
called the I max and half of this maximum uptake is half of I max.  
So here this Michaelis -Menten or Michael is constant is again just like in the previous slide we 
have seen that ion concentration which will be required to get the half of m aximum uptake is 
known as this Michael is constant just like we have seen in our previous slide . And that in fl ux I 
stands for influx or uptake and if flux means release . So here I or influx of ions can be related by 
this equation that is I max equal to I max multiplied by c minus c min or minimum concentration 
by k m plus c minus c min .  
So where I is the ion infl ux and I max is the  maximum ion influx k m is the Michaelis -Menten  
constant and represents the solution concentration at half of I max just like I have told you and c 
is the ion concentration in solution and c mean is the ion concentration at which I is 0 or no net 
influx . So the ion uptake and ion concentration can be related by assuming the same relations hip 
as we have seen in case of Michaelis -Menten kinetic describing the enzymes . So this mechanistic 
model of nutrient uptake can be realize d by assuming the Michaelis -Menten  kinetics.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:11)  
 
Now let us move ahead , let us now see what are the major processes to which the nutrient 
transforms in soil . So nutrient transformation and interaction can be discussed in terms of three major mec hanisms one is mineralization second is immobilization third one is nutrient uptake 
antagonism . So mineralization is the microbial process or is an oxidation process also it is 
basically conversion of nutrient from organic form to inorganic form .  
Minerali zation generally occurs when soil microorganisms feed on organic matter that contains 
concentration of nutrients that are greater than their own immediate requirements . Of course 
when the nutrient content is higher than their own immediate requirement then  only those 
nutrients are going to convert and they are going to be present in the soil in inorganic form . So 
this process is known as mineralization process .  
Generally organic materials with a low carbon to nutrient ratio are likely to cause mineralizati on 
during the decomposition process . We will see in our coming slides that this c n ratio or carbon 
to nitrogen ratio plays an important role in this nutrient mineralization process . Because when 
the carbon to nitrogen ratio is less that means the nutrient  content is quite high and that means 
there will be surplus amount of nutrient after they are being utilized by the microorganisms in the 
soil. And they will be released in the soil environment as inorganic nutrients so this is known as 
the mineralization process .  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:09)  
 
Now mineralization increases the bioavailability of the nutrients that were in decomposition that 
were in the decomposing organic compounds and most notably because of their  quantities nitrogen phosphorous and Sulphur.  So through mineralization process nitrogen phosphorus and 
sulfur are become more bioavailable and carbon mineralization is tightly coupled to the release 
of mineral nitrogen phosphorus and sulfur and can be driven by microbial requirements for 
carbon and nutrients for their maintenance growth and the production of extracellular metabolites 
including enzymes .  
Now here you can see that these when there is a leaf fall it will go through different types of 
processes through which  this mineralization ultimatel y results in the formation of these 
ammonium nitrate sulphate and orthophosphata and cell and so these are again being uptaken by 
the plant . So there are different types of factors modulating factors which governs this 
mineralization process . So we are goi ng to discuss all these in our coming slides .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:35)  
 
Now another process is known as immobilization process . Now this immobilization is just 
opposite to mineralization in case of mineralization we remember that there is a conversion o f 
organic form to inorganic form however in case of immobilization there is a conversion from 
inorganic form of the nutrients to organic form of nutrients .  
Now in case of immobilization the microorganisms incorporate the inorganic plant available 
forms of  the nutrients into their body tissues making the nutrients unavailable to the plants . And immobilization occurs when soil microorganisms feed on organic materials that contain 
concentration of nutrient that are lower than their own immediate requirement .  
Therefore , the organic materials with a high c or c 2 9 nutrient ratio are likely to cause 
immobilization during the decomposition . We are going to see in our coming slide that the 
materials with high cn ratio is generally much more liable to the immobili zation process . So 
again where the mineralization is the conversion of organic form of nutrient to inorganic form of 
nutrient immobilization is just opposite that is conversion of inorganic form of nutrient to 
organic form of nutrient .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:05)  
 
So now let us see what is mineralization immobilization turnover . So mineralization and 
immobilization occurs simultaneously in the soil , however the net balance between the two 
processes varies with environmental conditions and the characteristic s of the organic material 
available for decomposition .  
Both mineralization and immobilization are accelerated by conditions  favorable for microbial 
growth such as moist soil warm temperature good addition easily degradable organic substrate 
material subst rate material physical mixing of soil via tillage and higher soil ph . So when there is 
a moist soil that will favor the growth of the microorganisms also warm climate will also warm temperatures will also favors the growth of the microorganism growed aerat ion will help to boost 
their activity .  
Easily degradable organic substrate material substrate material will act as their energy source . 
Physical mixing of soil via tillage will incorporate more amount of air and more amount of 
organic material to the soil . And higher soil ph will also  encourage the activities of different 
microflora and microphone. S o that is why the mineralization and immobilization occurs 
simultaneously and the relative dominance of one mechanism depends on the situation that 
prevails at  that at the time in the soil  environment .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:48)  
 
Now if you see the nutrient transformation this picture gives you a overall view of nutrient  
transformation of course you can see when there are liters or crop residues that will go th rough  
decomposition process .  
And through the decomposition process there will be a release of carbon dioxide and this  and 
also there will be root exudation and there will be addi tion of dissolve organic matter through the 
rainfall and animal residues will  also go through decomposition process . And these nutrients will 
either  goes through the adsorption and desorption process in the soil minerals .  
And the soil organic matter again goes through the mineralization immobilization and when 
there is a decomposi tion of organic of crop residues  they will release this carbon dioxide and  . And which will be results of microbial oxidation and these nutrients will also go through surface 
runoff for erosion .  
So here in this dashed line you can see the dissolve organic  matter inputs and  also these  dissolve 
organic matter outputs you can see in this red arrows . So these nutrients which are there in this 
different animal residues and plant residues they will do different types of transformation based 
on this mineralizatio n immobilization they are also  supposed to leach down  due to the high 
amount  leads down to the to the to the lower layers of the soil .  
And the nutrients which are bound to this organic matter will either absorb or dissolve from the 
soil minerals . So these  are some of the transformation of nutrients in the soil .  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:11)  
 
Now let us see the carbon nitrogen ratio . Now carbon to nitrogen ratio in soil is the ratio of the 
mass to carbon mass of carbon to the mass of nitrogen in organic resid ues. It is the relationship 
between organic matter nitrogen content of soil or plants . Now soil organisms require carbon for 
building essential organic compounds and to obtain energy for life processes .  
But they must also obtain sufficient nitrogen to syn thesize nitrogen containing cellular 
components such as amino acids enzymes and DNA . So here you can see the corn crop is 
growing on the soil with high carbon to nitrogen ratio and here legume is growing in the soil 
with low carbon to nitrogen ratio . Of course when the carbon to nitrogen ratio is high the decomp osition will be lower because  decomposition will be slower because the microorganisms 
activity will be decreased .  
So microorganisms will deplete  soil of nitrate and ammonium until they die and relea se nitrate 
and ammonium . And in case of low carbon to nitrogen ratio decomposition is rapid due to higher 
nitrogen within the plant . And microorganisms are satisfied with plant nitrogen when 
microorganism die nitrate and ammonia are released increasing soi l nitrogen . So these are the 
implication of height cn ratio and low cn ratio .  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:48)  
 
Now influence let us see what are the influence of carbon to nitrogen ratio on nitrogen release . 
Now it controls the nitrogen availabil ity in the soi l and plants if C/N  ratio of organic matter is 
greater than is above  is about 20 25 is to one then the soil microbes will have to scavenge  the soil 
solution to obtain th e enough nitrogen. Thus  the incorporation of high cn residues will deplete 
the soil nat ive nitrogen .  
So in the absence of enough amount of nitrogen these microorganisms will uptake the nutrients 
from the solution so there will be depletion of nitro native nitrogen causing higher plants to 
suffer from nitrogen deficiency . While low cn ratio which is less than 20 organic matter helps in 
increase in nitrogen content of the soil for plant and organism .  So let us see some c n ratio of some of the organic materials like alpha alpha twenties to one 
microbial population ten is to one soil organic m atter ten to twelve is to one main stock forty  to 
one rice store hundred is to one and rice draw two hundred is to one .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:00)  
 
So here we can see here a ratio of twenty to thirty results in an equilibrium state between the 
mineralizat ion and immobilization and soil micro organisms have and c n ratio of around eight . 
So here you can see when the c n ratio is quite high that will results in nitrogen immobilization 
and nitrogen mineralization generally occurs when the cn ratio is low . 
So there is a threshold limit we can see here which is around 25 is to one which is also the c n 
ratio of a mature alpha alpha hay . And when we go for the finished compost it is 15 is to one in 
case of microbial biomass it is 10 is to one so that results in f ast decomposition . However when 
the cn ratio is quite low that is sawdust with straw and const over that increases the nitrogen 
immobilization .   
(Refer Slide Time: 19:54)  
 
Now there are some basic properties of a fertile soil . First of all they should b e rich in nutrients 
necessary for basic plant nutrition including nitrogen phosphorous and potassium . They contain 
sufficient minerals for plant nutrition including boron , chlorine cobalt copper iron manganese 
magnesium molybdenum sulfur and zinc .  
And it they con they generally contains soil organic matter that improves soil structure and soil 
moisture retention and soil ph is in the range between 6 to 6.8 for most plants . And they these 
soil should have good soil structure creating well drained soil . The range of microorganisms that 
supports they should have range of microorganisms that support plant growth . And they should 
often contain large amount of topsoil . So these are some of the basic properties of a fertile soil .   
(Refer Slide Time: 20:50)  
 
These are some of the factors affecting the soil stability to supply nutrients  these are the some of 
the factors which raise the soil fertility like high clay content high humus content good structure 
warm soil deep soil moist soil good drainage fertilization  desirable microbes and near neutral 
piece . These are all  features which help to raise the soil fertility .  
And these are some of the factors which  lowers the soil fertility like high sand content loss of 
organic matter compaction cold soil shallow soil dr y or wet soil excess irrigation drainage 
erosion root damaging  paste and ph  of acidic and alkaline  soil. So if it is too acidic or too 
alkaline that will also lowers the soil fertility .   
(Refer Slide Time: 21:42)  
 
Of course soil ph greatly affects the s olubility of the minerals and nutrients element availability . 
You can see here nitrogen is mostly available in in the near neutral condition  just like 
phosphorous potassium sulphur calcium magnesium . And their availability goes down when the 
soil becomes s trongly acid and strongly alkaline . In case of potassium the alkaline condition we 
can see  potassium and sulfur they are available in alkaline condition .  
But in case of calcium magnesium their availability goes down in case of strongly acidic and 
strongly  alkaline condition . In case of micronutrients iron manganese boron copper zinc they are 
basically available mostly available in medium acidic condition . And their availability goes 
down in the alkaline condition only exception is molybdenum in which the a vailability increases 
with strongly alkaline condition .   
(Refer Slide Time: 22:47)  
 
So this is  the implication of the soil acidity and alkalinity if the alkalinity is quite high we call it 
sodic soil . And calculus soils generally have neutral to mild mo derate and strong alkalinity . And 
in the humid region generally we can see formation of soil acid acidic soil and  generally forest 
soils are showing very strong to strong and merit medium and slight acidity .  
In case of acid pits we and also active acid su lphate soil we can see active soil extreme soil 
acidity . We know that ph is negative logarithm of hydrogenat ed concentration and below ph 5. 5 
aluminium  donates  the high hydrogen ion in the soil solution by hydrolysis and thus they 
contribute towards soil a cidity that is why both h plus i on and l three plus ion are considered as 
acidic .  
So here you can see they produce these hydrogen and into the soil solution and as a result they 
create so  toxicity for the root growth . So these aluminum three plus ion is a lso known as acidic 
ion apart from this h plus scatter .   
(Refer Slide Time: 24:15)  
 
Now let us see the importance of ph in plant nutrition of course the soil ph also influences the 
plant growth by  by the effect of ph on activity of beneficial microorgan isms. Better nutrient 
availability found in  at me and neutral ph which is 6.5 to 7.5 like nitrogen phosphorus potassium 
sulphur calcium magnesium . But in l ow ph acidic soil toxicity of i on aluminium manganese 
etcetera and deficiency of phosphorus molybdenu m can be seen .  
In saline and alkaline soils iron manganese zinc and copper may be deficient and molybdenum 
availability is more . It helps soil ph helps in recommendation of soil amendments and fertilizer 
application not only the fertilizer application but  also the reclamation of the acidic soil or 
alkaline soil is important so we have to add some  either we have to add lime or gypsum to 
correct the soil ph because soil ph influences the availability of the nutrients .  
In stro ngly acid soils when it is ph 4 .5 they have usually high and toxic concentration of soluble 
aluminum and manganese .   
(Refer Slide Time: 25:32)  
 
Now this is an inclusive overview of the dynamic soil plant nutrient relationship . Of course when 
there is an atmospheric nitrogen and that c an be fixed to biological nitrogen fixation and plant 
residues and manure also can  produce the soil organic matter . So they ultimately go through 
mineralization process to soil microflora and fauna .  
And the opposite process is immobilization process these  are bioavailable nutrients from which 
plants are uptaking  these nutrients through roots . So these are some atmospheric deposition we 
are also adding fertilizers and these nutrients are basically present in solution phase . So from the 
soil organic matter w e can see the formation of clay humans complexes and this nutrient gets 
trapped inside this clay humans complex and due to the weathering or disruption process they 
release into the soil solution .  
The opposite process is adsorption or fixat ion or precipit ation when these  freely available 
nutrients became trapped inside this clay humans complex . From these  soil solution nutrients 
they also can leach to the ground water and sometime there is a capillary rise of and plant uptake  
of these nutrients from the gr ound water . These nutrients from the soil solution can get entrapped 
into the rocks and due to the weathering process these nutrients gets released into the clay 
minerals and in the recrystallization process the clay minerals goes back into the rocks .  From the iron exchange process this nutrient gets exchanged to the nutrients which are present in 
soil solution . And also these nutrients are removed through seepage loss on the surface water . 
And some nutrients like nitrogen is also  released from the soil to  volatilization .  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:29)  
 
So nutrient imbalance  leads to soil health deterioration . So imbalances of nitrogen phosphorus 
and potassium application many a times due to non-availability  of potassium and phosphorous at 
right time and an af fordable prices create this imbalance . And not applying deficient secondary 
and micronutrients can also create this nutrient imbalance and finally not following integrated 
management based on available organic and inorganic nutrient sources can also create  this 
nutrient imbalance and health deterioration .  
So here you can see when all these three are zero  we can  see soil organic carbon only 0 .717 
percent , when they are o n equal amount we are getting 0 .52 and 1 .61 and also 0 .65 however 
when there is an imbal ance between these three elements we can see it is  further goes down . And 
so that shows that the balanced fertilization how it is important for the overall soil health and 
plant nutrition .   
(Refer Slide Time: 28:41)  
 
Over use of fertilizers particularly  nitrogen may also lead to nitrogen deposition and excessive 
use of nitrogen fertilizer leads to soil acidification which creates a negative soil health trait as it 
leads to imbalance in nutrient availability . And under use is another extreme so under use of 
fertilizer means that soil nutrient exported with crops are not being replenished and leading to 
soil degradation and declining is .  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:12)  
  
 
So guys by this  have completed these lectures of week one and these are some of the refe rences 
which I have used in this week lectures . And please feel free to go through this literature and if 
you have any question just feel free to  let me know and I will be more than happy to answer your 
queries . So these are some of the references .   
(Refer Slide Time: 29:37)  
 
And thank you let us meet in our next week of lectures to discuss some other aspects of plant 
nutrition . Thank you .  