Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Prof essor  Somsubha Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of T echnology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture 54  
Fertilizer Recommendation Approaches and Integrated Plant Nutrient Management 
(Contd.)  
 
Welcome friends , to this fourth lecture of week 11 of NPT EL Online Certification Course of 
Soil Fertility and Fertilizers . In this week , we are talking about fertilizer recommendation 
approaches and integrated  plant nutrient management or  INM . Now, in our previous  couple 
of lectures in this week , we have discussed about the concepts of  nutrient management and 
fertilizer recommendation .  
We have discussed about potential yield,  attainable yield , actual yield , we have also discussed 
about different types of nutrient recommendation and also interpretation and followed by 
nutrient recommendation methods , different types of soil fertility evolution methods , starting 
from deficiency symptoms , then plant tissue analysis , then microbial or biological methods , 
and also soil testing . 
We have also described the Colwell’s  approach , then percent yield  approach , then target yield  
concept , we have discussed and also,  we have started discussing about the soil analysis crop 
correlation approach , using the  target yield . We have seen t hat how we can calculate different 
components of this approach and then how we can input all those components to calculate the 
fertilizer requirement , setting up some  target yield . So, this lecture will extend that soil 
analysis crop response  approach , and also, we are going to see some case studies where this 
approach  has shown some benefits over traditional methods . (Refer Slide Time: 2:45)  
 
These are the concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture,  first of all we are going to 
talk about validity of targeted equation , and then different fertilizer schedules under 
verification trials , then we are going to also discuss Ready  Reckoner  of different fertilizer 
doses , then concept of site -specific nutrient management , and mode of Nutrition by site 
specific nutrient management . So, these are the concepts which we are going to cover in this 
lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:17)  
  
These are the keywords for this lecture.  Fertilizer  adjustment equation then verification trials 
then target yield , side switch ing nutrient management , and Indigenous nutrient supply, so 
these are some of the keywords of this lecture . Now, if we see the validity of  target yield 
equation,  the yield targeting equations are valid under some conditions or situation.  
First of all,  these are valid under similar soils occurring in a particular agro -ecoregion.  This is 
the first criteria , secondly,  targets chosen should not be unduly high or low and should be 
within the range of experimental yield s obtained.  The maximum  target should not exceed 75 
to 80 percent of the highest yield achieved for that crop in the area . 
This is the second criteria , the third criteria is other micro and secondary nutrients should not 
be illumining , that means those micro and secondary nutrients should be present  in optimum 
quantity in that soils . And recommended agro -ecoregion  practices need to be followed while 
growing the crops . So, these are the four major  assumptions , when we can apply or situations , 
where we can apply this  target in equation.  (Refer Slide T ime: 5:01)  
 
Now, this is the basic data and fertilizer adjustment equation for potato , for the variety Kufri 
Jyoti  in West Bengal , state of India and we can see that N, P2 5, K2O requirement , nutrient 
and, so NR, CS, and CF for all these three nutrients a re given , and we can see the targeted 
yield equation.  
So, for fertilizer nitrogen we can see 3.61, T  which is the targeted minus 0.45,  SN means soil 
nitrogen, so once we calculate the soil available nitrogen , if we input this we can , and if we 
have a target yield , we can calculate the fertilizer nitrogen . Similarly , we can calculate the 
fertilizer P 25  as well as fertilizer K2 . So, this is how we can calculate the fertilizer need for 
these three different nutrients . 
(Refer Slide Time: 6:14)  
  
Similarly , for groundnut , we can see for variety TAQ -24, we can see here the NR, CS, CF for 
N, P25,  and K 2,  and also, we can see target yield equation for three different nutrients . Now, 
how to do the validation of the output ? So for validation of the output we need some field 
trials also . 
(Refer Slide Time: 6:50)  
 
Now, let us see some results . One of the results we have seen that there are two trials , Trial 1 
and Trial 2, and there are four different treatments . The first treatment is Farmers practice T 1, 
T2 is the government recommended dose , T3 is the soil test based fertilizer dose targeting 35 
quintal hectare per yield , and fourth one is soil test based fertilizer dose targeting 40 quintal 
hectare per hectare yield . So, we can see that in case of government recom mended dose , the profit of per hectare over 
T1 that is formal practice,  we can see in case of Trial 1 using the government recommend 
dose,  it is 172 rupees . However , there is a loss of 193 rupees for Trial 2 using the government 
recommended dose. W hen we a re using T3 , we are having a loss of 420,  and in case of Trial 
2, we are getting a profit of 291 . In case of Trial 1 using T4,  we are getting 1000  rupees of 
profit , and in case of Trial 2 we are getting a profit of 291.  In case of Trial 1 using T4,  the 
soil test,  base fertilizer toast , using some  target yield , like 40 quintal per hectare , then we are 
getting  optimum profit per hectare.  
(Refer Slide Time: 8:37)  
 
Similarly , for rapeseed  also, there are two trials with four different treatments , and similarly  
you can see when we are using the government recommended tools,  we are getting 1413  
rupees per hectare in first trial , and in the second trial we are getting 141 rupees per hectare . 
In case of T 3,  we are getting 1341,  however , in case of Trial 1, we are getting 6 rupees per 
hectare loss . In case of soil test , based fertilizer dose targeting 14 quintals , T3 was 12  
quintals , however when we are increasing it to 14 quintals , we are getting 3083 and 2479  
rupees per hectare as profit . (Refer Slide Time: 9:28)  
 
So, if you see the Ready Reckoner  of fertilizer doses , you can see for different states and 
different crops , for different types of soil , we can have these STCR equation.  Another  name 
of the soil analysis fertility crop correlation is  STCR or soil take test crop  response equations 
for target yields , and we are getting this type of equations for all the states . 
(Refer Slide Time: 9:56)  
  
Similarly , for Orissa  and West Bengal , you can get this type , so for all the states for different 
types of crops , we can get this type of equations . Now, let us see some of the advantages of 
this approach.  The first advantage of this approach is under Optimum management condition.  
This approach ensures the achievement of desired yield target within plus minus 10 percent 
deviation.  Secondly,  efficient use of fertilizers are ensured according to soil fertility and crop 
requirement . And this as a whole ensures High profit and response to applied fertilizer , so 
this is the second advantage . 
The third Advantage is 8,  this usin g this approach,  we can maintain the soil fertility at 
appropriate levels in cropping system for sustainable Crop Production. The  fourth advantage 
of this method or this  STCR approach is , it offers wide choice of fixing appropriate yield  
target according t o the availability of resources and soil fertility .  And fifth one is suitable 
crop rotations also can be adopted from the point of view of relative ability of crops and crop 
varieties to utilize soil and fertilize the nutrients , so these are five major ad vantages of this  
STCR approach or soil analysis crop correlation -based  approach . Where we are fixing a  
target , and target yield , and for attaining that  target end, we are using soil test values , I mean 
we are calculating the fertilizer requirements using t he soil test values for different nutrients , 
okay.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:50)  
 
Now, apart from the advantages of this STCR approach , this STCR has some limitations also . 
First of all,  this approach is heavily biased towards high fertility of native and applied 
nutrients . Secondly,  the target yield equation has to be revalidated in different agro -ecoregion  
and factors have to be derived to accommodate curvilinearity . Now, during practical 
implementation of the theory , some unwarranted issues may arise in th is approach . For 
example,  unavailability of skilled human resource , then miscommunication between research 
organizations and farmers , and then unwillingness of soil testing and magnetic equipment . 
So, these above issues may be tackled through proper or eff ective implementation of policies 
by the government agencies . So, these are some of the limitations and these should be  
properly addressed, so that these STCR approach can be utilized effectively . (Refer Slide Time: 13:04)  
 
 
Now, let us discuss another important concept that is  SSNM or site-specific nutrient 
management concept and approaches for nutrient management system . Now, International 
rights Research Institute or IR RI, together with national agricultural research and extension 
system launched a research project in 1997 to develop site specific nutrient management 
technology for intensive right system . 
Now,  what is SSN M? It may be defined as the dynamic field specific management of 
nutrients in a particular cropping season to optimize the supply and  demand of nutrients 
according to their differences in cycling through soil plant systems . Again, as per the 
definition it is a dynamic field specific management of nutrients , to optimize the supply of the 
nutrients according to the crop demand.  (Refer Sli de Time: 14:16)  
 
Now, what are the principles of SSN M? F irst of all,  regional and seasonal differences in the 
climatic yield potential and crop nutrient demand , then between Fields special variabilities in 
indigenous nutrient Supply,  then fields specific within season dynamics of crop nutrients 
demand , and full location specific cropping system and crop management practices , and the 
and the next one is the most important that is called 4R stewardship concept , that is a right 
product , right place , right time , and right amount . 
You may see this 4R concept is a  buzzword nowadays , and people are using this right 
product , right place , right time , and right amount concept or 4R  concept , everywhere. 
Whereas , we are going for the site spacing nutrient management . (Refer Slide Time: 15:22)  
 
Now, some examples of key scientific principles and associated  practices of 4R  Newton 
stewardship . We have told that 4R means right product , right place , right time , and right 
amount , so right product , right rate , right time , and right place . So, right product means in,  we 
have to ensure balance supply of nutrients which will suit soil properties . What are the 
associated practices ? Commercial  fertilizer , livestock manure , compost , crop residue , these 
are the associated practices . 
What is right rate that is assessing nutrient Supply from all sources and assessing plant 
demand , so using these  two scientific bases , we have to calculate the right rate.  Just like in 
case of right product , we have considered the balance supply of nutrie nts and you know the 
soil properties . Similarly , for calculating the right rate , we have to calc we have to consider as 
you know nutrient Supply from all sources , and plant demand.  What are the associated 
practices tests ? You know we have to taste soil for  nutrients and you have to balance crop 
removal . 
Right time means you have to assess dynamics of crop uptake and soil supply and you have 
to determine timing of loss risk . You have to apply nutrients , pre-planting,  at planting,  at 
flowering,  at fruiting , so these are the right times . And right place means you have to 
consider or recognize crop rooting pattern and you have to also manage the special 
variability , so you can select either broadcast or band or drill or inject or you can go with the 
variable rat e application . So, these are some scientific principle and associated practices of 4R  Newton's stewardship.  
And these 4R  Newton's stewardship is the backbone of site -specific nutrient management or 
SSNM . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:47)  
 
 
So, what we understand that sit e specific nutrient management can tackle typical problems of 
imbalanced nutrition and imbalance fertilization through soil testing . Now, in the site -specific 
nutrient management , we have to first fix a targeted , and then we have to optimize the use of 
indigenous nutrient resources . Then we have to apply N , P, K to match the crop need . In the 
third , we have to apply the zinc , sulphur , and micronutrient based on local recommendation.  
Then we have to select most economic fertilizers resources or fert ilizer sources . Then we 
have to use the leaf colour  chart to apply nitrogen as needed by the crop , we can also use quantity seed,  optimum plant density,  integrated Pest Management , and good water 
management for SSNM . And also , finally , we can also use Omis sion plot technique to 
determine indigenous phosphorus and potassium Supply. S o, these are some of the steps or 
some of the important components of site -specific  nutrient management , after fixing a  target 
field. 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:16)  
 
Now, what are th e mode of nutrition by SSNM . You can use multi -nutrient carrier , you can 
use microbial inoculation , you can use slow -release nitrogenous fertilizer , you can use 
nitrification Inhibitors , you can use customized fortified or value -added  fertilizers , you can 
use micronutrient  addition,  you can use mineral study,  you can use plant study,  you can use 
soil test crop response correlation . So, all of these we have already discussed . So, you can see 
that using all these methods , we can achieve the site -specific nutrient management . So, all 
these are integral components of site -specific nutrient management , okay.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:01)  
 
Now, let us see how to calculate the crop nutrient requirement in  SSNM, so the nutrient 
requirements in  SSNM are estimated using  a model . This model name is quantitative 
evaluation of the fertility of the tropical soils or QUEFTS  model . So, this QUEFTS  model 
was developed by Jans sen et al.,  in 1990 , which has been adapted for Rice,  by Witt et al. in 
1999. So,  this QUEFTS  model is used for nutrient requirement in SSNM . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:39)  
 
Now, we determine how much fertilizer nitrogen to apply?  For example, so we have to 
estimate the total fertilizer nitrogen required for rice in a season and based on the expected  
yield respo nse to nitrogen and efficiency fertilizer nitrogen use . So, fertilizer nitrogen calculation can be done using in response to fertilizer nitrogen multiplied by nitrogen use 
efficiency . So, this is how we can calculate the fertilizer nitrogen requirement . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:06)  
 
So, let us see an optimal rate of fertilizer nitrogen depends upon increase in yield, so here in 
this chart or in this graph we can see , in the x -axis we are seeing two extreme conditions  
where no added nitrogen and here you can s ee this body presents the applied nitrogen 
fertilizer and, in the y- axis, we can say grain yield . So, when there is a no added fertilizer and 
in case of applied nitrogen fertilizer , let us see the steps . 
The step one is we have to establish a yield  target , and second step is to effectively use the 
existing nutrient . So, when there is a no added nitrogen of course we are getting some yield , 
so this is the yield which we are getting through native supply of nitrogen from the soil . And 
then if we use the nitrogen , so we apply the nitrogen to meet the crop needs and target is to 
achieve 18 to 25 kg of grain increase per 1 kg of nitrogen applied , so you can see when we 
are applying the nitrogenous fertilizer , we are getting this yield response . 
So, earlier we are getting this  yield response where plants are growing using the native 
nitrogen,  and when we are applying the nitrogen then we can see the  yield response . So, the 
difference between the target yield , add the , if you know the yield of the using the existing  
nutrient , you can see the difference, so application of nitrogen is giving you the is  yield 
response . (Refer Slide Time: 22:57)  
 
So, the steps are basically , first of all,  you have to establish an attainable yield target, so here 
we are basically fixing  an attenable  yield  target . And then,  we have to effectively use 
indigenous supply of phosphorus and potassium to achieve highest possible yield without 
adding the nutrient , so here you can see this yellow bar is showing.  And then we have to add 
nutrient t o fill the Gap and maintain the soil fertility . So, here you can see this is the neutral 
limited yield and this is the additional yield which we are getting by adding the fertilizer 
nutrient . So, this is how you can optimally supply the crop needs for phos phorus and 
potassium . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:46)  
 Now, for indigenous nutrient Supply , nutrient Omission plot techniques can be used to 
determine the need of fertilizer , phosphorus , and potassium . So, here you can see this is  the 
scheme, so we have and yie ld target and we use the full fertilization of NPK , and then we are 
applying the full phosphorus potassium but we are  not applying the nitrogen, so we will get 
the nitrogen limited yield . Similarly , we are also using the full NK but we are removing the 
phosphorus we are not giving the phosphorus fertilization, so we are giving,  we are getting 
phosphorus limited yield.  
And then,  we are not giving again potassium fertilizer and we are getting the nitrogen and 
phosphorus , we are giving only the nitrogen phosphorus fertilizers , we are getting the 
potassium limited yield . So, by seeing the differences , by comparing the differences , we can 
see the impact of different nutrients on the corrupt growth, so this is called  Omission plot 
technique . 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:48)  
 
Now, if you see the recommended phosphorus pentoxide rates according to the yield target 
and P limited yield . So, yield in 0  P plot that means when we had wheat,  we have  not applied 
any first for us , so if these yields are from 3  ton per hectare , 4 ton per hectare,  5 6 7 8  tons per 
hectare,  and if our  target yield is 4 tons or 5  tons up to 8 tons per hectare, so we can see that 
recommended fertilizer P 25 rate in kg per hectare . So, wheat at all has showed this  chart for 
recommending the fat P 205 rate s according to yield target and in case of  phosphorus limited 
yield condition.  (Refer Slide Time: 25:40)  
 
 
Similarly , for potassium limited  yield condition also at medium straw inputs , we can see this 
is the recommended K2 rates . If we see the SSNM  in different countries , we will see that in 
case of  Maize,  mainly  SSNM is practiced in USA . So, conventional practices and different 
types of SSNM  practice can save a nitrogen . In case of Philippines , SSNM is practiced in rice 
and we can see conventional and S SNM practice and we can see that there is saving of 
nitrogen. I n case of China , SSNM is applied in rice and you can see there is saving of 
nitrogen.  In case of India,  we can also see that incident in practice can save nitrogen , as 
compared to the  as compar ed to the conventional  fertilization . (Refer Slide Time: 26:40)  
 
Now, what are the factors which affect the performance of  SSNM ? Performance of SSNM 
depends on upon the availability of water during the cultivation,  and also it depends upon the 
attack of insect pests during growing season.  Performance of  SSNM is affected by the use of 
a not fully calibrated QUEFTS model that overestimated the nutrient yields . Next, and 
farmers often miscalculated SSNM practices , where SSNM is practiced or analysed , so thes e 
are some of the factors which can affect the performance of SSNM practice.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:18)  
 
Now, what are the major benefits of  SSNM ? There  are three major benefits , first major 
benefit is to get the higher profit , so SSNM can increase and mai ntain yields by optimizing 
the balance between supply and demand of nutrients and providing more balanced plan nutrition . In general , it improves nutrient use efficiency and provides greater Returns on 
investment in fertilizer . This is the first  benefit of  SSNM . 
The second is , reduce nitrous oxide emission.  Now, agriculture you know that agriculture 
contributes 70 to 90 percent of nitrous oxide emission mostly from nitrogen fertilizer , and 
this nitrous oxide is known as a greenhouse gas . So, SSNM, when you practice a SSNM that 
reduces the nitrous oxide emission by reducing total nitrogen application and a timing of 
application to crop needs , because we have seen that we are you , in the SSNM and we see 
slow -release nitrogenous fertilizer is in component . 
So, when we are using those different types of slow -release nitrogenous fertilizer , 
nitrogenous Inhibitors , then we can see that nitrous oxide emission is reduced,  and avoiding 
and thus we can avoid the nitrogen losses to volatile digestion leaching and runoff . And the 
third important benefit is , improved disease resistance, so the more balanced NPK nutrition 
that comes with nitrogenous lead to improve resistant to plant diseases . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:50)  
 
So summarily , we can see that  SSNM aims to increase t he profit to Farmers through high 
yield and high efficiency of fertilizer use.  It considered differences in nutrient management , 
using real -time nitrogen management , long term phosphorus and potassium management , and 
strategies for micronutrients . 
It also provides tools to observe visual effects , that is using LCC , Omission plots and 
demonstration plots . It encourages Farmer’s  experimentation ; it provides principles and 
guidelines to asset decision making by extension.  And it may also reduce space incidence,  particularly the disease those are often associated with excessive nitrogen use or unbalanced 
Plant Nutrition may be partially controlled . So, these are the benefits of  SSNM . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:46)  
 
So, guys , we have wrapped , we have completed this  discussion  regarding SSNM and 
different types of nutrient  recommendation approaches . Let us  wrap up this lecture and let us  
discuss more about  the integrated nutrient management and different approaches of integrated 
linear nutrient management in our next l ecture,  with the with the help of some case studies . 
Thank you.  