Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department   
Indian Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur   
Lecture 56  
Agricultural  Productivity  and Environmental  Quality  
Welcome friends  to this new week  of lectures for the NPTEL online  certification  course  of 
Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers.  This is our last week  of lectures.  We are at week  12.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:41)  
 
And in this week,  we are going  to discuss about  the different  environmental  aspects  which  are 
related  to the agricultural  productivity  and nutrient  management.  So, the topic  of this week  of 
lectures  is agricultural  productivity  and environmental  quality.  Now,  in this first lecture,  we 
are going to discuss a very important  concept  which  has got enough attention  in recent  days,  
this is called  carbon  sequestration.  So, this lecture number  56 will be focused  on carbon  
sequestration  and different  aspects  of carbon  management.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  01:31)  
 
So, let us discuss the carbon  sequestration . These are the concepts  which  we are going  to 
discuss in this lecture.  First of all, we are going to talk about  the role of organic  carbon  in 
soil. And then,  we are going to also talk about  soil carbon  sequestration  and then soil organic  
carbon  stock  in Indian soil and then soil erosion and carbon  emission  in India.  And then we 
are going to discuss the impacts  of management  practices  on carbon  sequestration.  So, these  
are the 5 major  concepts  which  we are going  to cover  in this lecture number  56.  
(Refer  Slide Time:  2:14)  
 
And,  the 5 different  keywords  which  are related  to this lecture  are carbon  sequestration,  
carbon  pool, carbon  dioxide  emission , carbon  balance and carbon  biosequestration.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  02:33)  
 
Now,  let us discuss what  is sustainabl e development  goals  of United  Nations.  So, we know  
that United  Nations  has developed  17 global  goals  for sustainable  development . Just like here 
you can see no poverty , goal number  one is no poverty.  There  is zero hunger , then good  
health  and well-being,  quality  education,  gender  equality,  clean  water  and sanitation  and 
affordable  and clean  energy , then decent  work  and economic  growth,  then industry  
innovation and infrastructure , then reduced  inequalities,  sustainable  cities  and communities , 
responsible  consumption production.  
And then you can see climate  action  goal number  13. And apart  from  that also life below  
water , life on land,  peace and justice,  strong  institution  and partnership  for the goals.  Now,  
you can see the goal number  13 that is called  climate  action.  So, climate  has gotten  
tremendous  importance  in the sustainable  development  goals  set, which  are developed by this 
United  Nations.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  03:50)  
 
Now,  of course,  if we see that these  policies  are here having  the policies  which  are being  
developed at the United  Nations  have  their tremendous  impact  on maintaining  the sustainable  
ecosystem.  Now,  we know  that policy decision  can give the incentives  to that which  will be 
required  for making the decision  by firms  and individuals  and then we can see their decisions  
will convert  into actions,  which  will govern these  ecosystems  or which  will impact  these  
ecosystems . Also,  these  non-anthropogenic  approaches  also will be taken  care of in the policy  
decisions.   
Of course,  from  this ecosystem,  we can see the ecological  production  function  which  goes to 
ecosystem  services  which  again  goes to the benefits  and cost using the valuation.  Now,  the 
policy decis ion not only depends  on the non-anthropogenic  approac hes, but also biophysical  
trade- offs, whic h generates  from  the ecosystem  services . And also the benefits  and costs that 
means  the economic  efficiency  also impact  the policy decision  and are there  are other  
considerations  also.  
So, ultimately,  one thing we can say that these  global  policies  of climate  action  is dependent  
on different  factors , different  consideration,  economic efficiency  as well as the ecosystem  
services . Ecosystem  service and ecosystem  or ecological  production function plays  an 
important  role in the policy  decision  that is why you can see that the thirteen th goal that is 
climate  action  is there in this all Sustainable  Development  Goals.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  05:57)  
 
Now,  if we see soil carbon  pool,  now, soils at the largest  carbon  reserves  of the terrestrial  
carbon  cycle.  Now, carbo n pool in the soil has been  exhausted  since  the beginning of the 
agriculture . The day human civilization  started  agricultural  practices  then there from  then 
there is a decline of the carbon  pool of soil.  
Now,  intensive  cultivation  leads  to decline in soil organic  matter  content  and atmospheric  
carbon  dioxide  concentration  continues  to increase globally due to different  factors , due to 
anthropogenic  factors , due to industrialization  they were several  factors.  So, atmospheric  
carbon  dioxide  concentration  continues  to increase globally.   
So, the aim should be to have  a positive  carbon  budget,  so, as to render  soils to a sink rather  
than a source  of atmospheric  carbon.  Instead  of considering soil as a source  of atmospheric  
carbon  can we convert  this carbon  whic h is present  in the atmosphere  reversibly  into soil 
components.  So, this should be the optimum  goal for maintenance of a positive  carbon  
budget.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  07:28)  
 
Now,  you can see that is carbon  moves  from  soil to atmosphere  and from  atmosphere  plants  
also take those  carbon  dioxides  to develop  the photosynthetic  products  and then again  those  
organic  matter  will decompose  and come into the soil organic  matter.  So, there is in a 
continuous  cycling  of carbon  between  the soil and the atmosphere  and also inside  the plan 
body.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  08:02)  
 
Now,  so, why carbon  is important?  We know  that carbon  is the major  building  blocks  for all 
the carbon  compounds.  These carbon  compounds  are the building blocks,  major  building  
blocks  for all life of all organisms  in earth , whatever  we talk about  like carbohydrate,  protein,  fat, these  are the major  building blocks  for all life for all organisms  on Earth.  And carbon  is 
also important  from  agricultural  point  of view.   
Now,  if we consider  the agricultural  rolls of organic  carbon,  then soil organic  carbon  is 
fundamenta l to soil fertility,  because it is the storehouse  of all the plant  nutrients  and also the 
addition of organic  matter  improves  the soil structure  by its binding action.  Then,  also, it 
plays  ecological  roles,  which  utilizes  carbon  as the initial food source.  So, carbon  also acts as 
a initial food source  and soil organic  carbon  is the basis for sustainable  agriculture.  So, 
without  organic  carbon,  it is not possible  to maintain  sustainability  agriculture rather,  
maintaining  the proper  organic  matter  or proper  organic  carbon  in the soil is a goal of 
sustainable  agriculture.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  09:30)  
 
Now,  let us discuss what  is carbon  sequestration.  As we have  seen in our previous  slide that 
policy decisions  take care of the environmental  factors,  ecosys tem services  and ecological  
considerations.  So, to reverse  the higher  concentration  of carbon  dioxide  in the atmosp here it 
is required  to convert  the atmospheric  carbon  into the soil carbon  pool.  Now,  the conversion  
of or carbon  from  the atmosphere  to the soil organic  carbon  is called  the carbon  sequestration.  
Now,  carbon  sequestration  is the process  of transferring  carbon  dioxide  from  the atmosphere  
into stable  terrestrial  carbon  pools.   
Now,  it can be driven  naturally  or anthropogenically,  anthropogenically  by different  
management  practices  and also there are different  natural  sequestration  processor  also there 
which  we are going to discuss in our coming slide.  Now,  in case of soil carbon  sequestratio n, the definition  of the soil carbon  sequestration  says that it is the process  of transferring  carbon  
dioxide  from  the atmosphere  into the soil of a land unit through  plants,  plant  residues  and 
other  organic  solids  which  are stored  or retained  in the unit as part of the soil organic  matter  
or humus.  So, this is basically  conversion of carbon  from  carbon  dioxide  to the humus  whic h 
is which  resides  in the soil.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:20)  
 
Now,  if we see the distribution  of the carbon  sequestration,  we can see that above  ground 
carbon  sequestration  by vegetation  accounts  for 610 pentagrams  whereas,  the below  ground  
carbon  sequestration  in the soil accounts  for 2300 pentagram,  so, it is very obvious  that soil is 
the major  source  of carbon  sequestration.   (Refe r Slide  Time:  11:51)  
 
Now,  I told you about  the natural  sequestration.  Now,  natural  sequestration  also have several  
types.  First of all, peat bogs,  so, peat bogs are an important carbon  source.  By creating  new 
bogs  or preserving  or enhancing the existing  ones,  carbon  can be sequestered.  Then  
reforestation  is another  way of natural  sequestration.  So, reforestation  is the planting of trees 
on marginal  crop and pasture  lands  to incorporate  carbon  from  atmospheric  carbon  dioxide  
into the biomass.  So, this is another  way of natural  sequestration.   
And third  is wetland  restoration.  So, wetland  soil is an important  carbon  sink.  14.5 percent  of 
the world  soil carbon  is found in wetlands  while  only 6 percent  of the world’ s land is 
composed of wets lands.  So, creatin g more  wetlands  would sequester  more  carbon  in the soil. 
So, these  are different  processes  of natural  sequestration.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:00)  
 
Now,  why we need  carbon  sequestration?  If this question comes  to our mind,  the answer  is 
first of all, climate  change  mitigation  is the first reason.  The second  reason  is improving soil 
fertility.  Of course,  as carbon  dioxide  is an important  greenhouse  gas. So, if we convert  the 
higher  carbon  dioxide  concentration  in the atmosphere  and then if we can reduce that higher  
carbon  dioxide  concentration  in the atmosphere  by converting the carbon  dioxide  into some  
organic  matter,  through  carbon  sequestration,  that will impact  the climate  change  positively.   
Secondly,  improving  soil fertility  not only converting the carbo n into soil carbon  pool,  but 
also to improve  the soil fertility  also, this carbon  sequestration  plays  an important role. So, 
carbon  sequestration  is a very important process  for not only the climate  change  mitigation,  
but also to improve  soil fertility,  which will ultimately  impact  the growth  of the plant.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  14:16)  
 
Now,  if you see the change  in atmospheric  concentration  of trace gases,  since  the Industrial  
Revolution,  which  occurred  set around 1750. So, we can see that carbon  dioxide  right now,  
the present  concentration  is 379 ppm,  methane is, so, percent  increase since  1750.  We can see 
it is 31 percent  increase and currently  present  rate of increase is 0.4 percent  per year.  In case a 
methane,  you can see 151 percent  increase since  1750.  Currently  1745 ppb concentration  is 
there and the percent  rate of increase is 0.4 percent  per year.   
In case of nitrous  oxide , you can see the percent  increase in 1750,  17 percent . Right now,  it is 
314 ppb and it is increasing  at a rate of 0.25 percent  per year. Only the chlorofluorocarbon  is 
right  now,  the concentration  of fluorocarbon is 268 ppt or parts  per trillion  and it is showing a 
decreasing  concentration.  So, we can see that the global  average atmospheric  carbon  dioxide  
in 2019 was 409.8 ppm.  So, you see that, how due to industrialization,  there  are a different  
greenhouse  gases  have  increased  as an alarming  rate since  the 1750.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  15:53)  
 
Now,  if we see the rising  atmospheric  carbon  dioxide  concentration  and temperature in this 
first graph,  we can see that temporal  increase in temperature anomaly  relative  to 1961 to 
1990.  So, you can see from  there has been  a continuous  global  average temperature change  
from  1850  to 2100.   
And you can see there is always  continuous  increase in global  average temperature and also 
you can see there has been  a continuous  increase in carbon  dioxide  concentration  for last 40 
years.  So, the annual  mean  carbon  dioxide  emission  versus  global  mean  surface temperature  
anomaly  you can see that both of them  are increasing  for last 40 years.  So, that shows  the 
impact  of different  anthropogenic  as well as industrial process  for rising  the atmospheric  
carbon  dioxide  concentration  and as well as temperature .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  17:04)  
 
 
Because when  there is a high concentration  carbon  dioxide  concentration  that impacts  the 
temperature and of course,  with the higher  carbon  dioxide  concentration  you can expect  the 
increase in mean  temperature,  atmospheric  temperature as you can see that mean  surface  
temperature is also increasing  for last 40 years  due to increase in carbon  dioxide  
concentration.   
Now,  if we see the organic  carbon  pools  in soils of India  in the world,  you can see that in 
India  Alfisols  contains  around  4.22 pentagram  for 0 to 30 centimeter . And Aridi sol, andisol  
you can see and at the same  time you can see the world  concentration  also for the world  soil. 
So, you can clearly  see that the Indian soils are inherently poor in organic  carbon.  So, for example,  if you consider  the Alfisols  of the world  it contains  73 pentagram  in 0 to 25 
centimeter . However,  in case of India  it is only 4.22 pentagram .  
In case of in case 0 to 150 centimeter  you can see 13.54 pentagram  however,  in the world  it is 
136. So, organic  carbon  pools  in soils in the world  we can have  a comparison and Indian soils 
are inherently poor in organic  carbon  due to several  reasons  we will discuss them.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:50)  
 
Now you can also see soil organic  carbon  stock  in Indian soil is of course  low as you can see 
here the SOC  content  in gram  per kg in different  soils of India  we can see. So, inherently  soil 
organic  carbon  stock  in Indian soil is low.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:07)  
 Now,  the question is why our Indian  soil is having  low soil organic  carbon ? There are several  
reasons . First reason  is soils have  been  cultivated  for centuries  and often  with low off-firm 
inputs.  Then  tropical  climate  is another  important reason  for low soil organic  carbon  because 
tropical  climate  the organic  carbon  decomposition is quite  fast in Indian soil and also soil 
mining  practices  of excessive tillage , little or no use of organic  manures,  then little or no crop 
residues  returned  to the soil, several  soil degradation.  So, all these  are important  reason  for 
lower  soil organic  carbon.   
Our organic  manner  application  is very low. And as a result  there  the buildup of organic  
carbon  in Indian soil is very slow.  So, there is also little or no crop residue  returned  to the soil 
and as a result  the organic  matter  buildup  is also declining.  And of course,  the anothe r 
important  is soil degradation.  So, soil degradation is another  way of reducing the soil organic  
carbon  pool.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:26)  
 
Now,  if you see the soil erosion  and carbon  emission  in India  total soil erosion you can see 
2.98 pentagram  sediment s per year and total carbon  loss is 23.8 to 35.8 terra gram  carbon  per 
year and carbon  emission  at 20 percent  of the displace carbon  is 4.8 to 7.2 terra gram  carbon  
per year.  So, these  are some  of the statistics  of soil erosion and carbon  emission  in India .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  21:02)  
 
Now,  what  are the impacts  of soil organic  carbon ? So, accelerated  soil erosion depletes . What 
are the impacts  of this degradation on soil organic  carbon?  So, we know  that accelerated  soil 
erosion depletes  the soil organic  pool severely  and rapidly  even  in the surface 0 to 10 
centimeter  layer,  the soil organic  carbon  pool may be lower  than 5 gram  per kg and 20 
percent  of the soil organic  carbon  displaced  by erosion  is mineralized.  And there is an erosion 
induced emission  of 15 Terra  gram  carbon  per year in the US and 1.1 penta gram  of carbon  
per year in the world.   
In India,  total carbon  displaced  by erosion is 29.8 Terra  gram  of carbon  per year. It is 
assuming  that 20 percent  of the eroded  soil organic  carbon  is mineralized  and erosion induced  
the emission  of carbon  in India  is estimated  as 6 Terra  gram  carbon  per year.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  22:09)  
 
So, the next questi on is how carbon  is sequestered?  So, there are several  ways . First of all 
directly  through photosynthesis.  So, using  solar  energy,  a plant  can convert  carbon  dioxide  
and water  into organic  compound.  So, this is one way of carbon  sequestration,  the maximum  
amount  of carbon  that can be produced is known as gross  primary  productivity.  So, the 
difference between  the GPP or gross  primary  productivity and respiration  is called  the net 
primary  productivity or the NPP. NPP is generally  believed  to be 45 percent  of the GPP.   
Now,  the higher  NPP the more  carbon  is transferred  to stable  pools  in the soil, indirectly  
through also management  practices,  we can favor  less carbon  dioxide  emission.  So, there  are 
two major  ways , one is directly through photosynthesis.  Another  is indirectly  through  
different  management  practices.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  23:05)  
 
Now,  if we see the diagramm atic view,  you can see the atmospheric  carbon dioxide  which  is 
around 750 pentagram,  it can convert  into photosynthetic  products.  So, there  will be a carbon  
dioxide  capture and ultimately  this photosynthetic  translocation  will occur  to roots  and then 
root exudation or to rhizosphere  and then metabolism of small and macro  molecules  in the 
rhizosphere  and beyond.  And then re-respiration  of the soil organic  molecules  at various  
sites.  So, this is an one other  way of moving  of carbon  from  atmosphere  to soil and then again  
their emission  from  soil to atmosphere.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  23:54)  
 
Now,  the potential  of carbon  sequestration  in soils of India  in different  agro eco-regions  we 
can see here,  in case of sub humid  regio n, which  consists of 86.4 million  hectare.  We can see the it has the highest  carbon  sequestration  potential  with 3.46 to 5.18 Terra  gram  per year.  So, 
the total carbon  sequestration  potential  accounts  for 12.71  to 19.32  Terra  gram  per year.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:34)  
 
So, the total potential  of carbon  sequestration  in soils of India  we can see that restoration  of 
the degraded  lands  can accounts  for 7.2 to 9.8. Then  agricultural  intensification  can accounts  
for 5.5 to 6.7. Secondary  carbonates  can accounts  for 21.8 to 25.6.  Erosion control  can 
account  for 4.8 to 7.2 and a total it will be around  39.3 to 49.3.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:04)  
 
Now,  what  are the management  approaches  for positive  carbon  balance?  You can see the soil 
carbon  sequestration  can, we can see that we can manage the soil carbon  sequestration  two way by changing the land use and also by soil and vegetation  management.  So, how to 
change  the land use. So, we can restore  the degraded  land.  We can control  the erosion and 
also we can help in retaining  agriculturally  marginal  lands.  So, these  three  are the land use 
change  which  you can use for soil carbon  sequestration.  And in the soil and vegetation  
management  we can do residue  management  like conservation tillage , mulch  farming  and 
residue  return.   
In case of also, we can do improve  cropping like agroforestry  cover  crops , crop rotations  and 
then integrated  nutrient  management  like incorporating compost  manure,  green  manure,  
judicious  use of chemicals  and then we can also do pasture  management  by control  grazing  
and improve  species.  So, these are some  of the ways  of management  for soil carbon  
sequestration.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  26:14)  
 
Now,  if you see the technological  options  for soil carbon  sequestration,  you can see green  
maneuvering can be done  for sugarcane rice, wheat  and rice in tropical,  north -western  and 
tropical  region.  Similarly,  you can see mulch  farming  and conservation tillage  is useful  for 
rice, wheat,  barley,  millet and soybean wheat  in Punjab and arid central  region and all other  
afforestation,  agroforestry  grazing  management  and integrated  nutrient  management  and their 
respective cropping system  and region are also mentioned here.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  26:46)  
 
Now,  if we see the impacts  of management  practices  on carbon  sequestration,  of course,  the 
carbon  sequestration  can help in augmenting  the soil fertility.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  26:57)  
 
We can see that negative  carbon  flux with no tillage,  no tillage  is a way of conservation 
tillage  or conservation agriculture.  You can see in case of conventional  agriculture,  the 
carbon  sequestration  in soil is 0 kg carbon  per hectare per year.  At the same  time, we can see 
there will be 337 kg of carbon will be fixed  in the soil using no tillage.  Similarly,  there will 
be positive  carbon  emission  from  farm  machinery,  more  positive  carbon  emission  from  farm 
machinery  in case of conventional  tillage,  then no tillage.   Carbon emission  from  agriculture  inputs  will be a little bit higher  in case of no tillage  as 
compared  to conventional  tillage.  However,  if we consider  the net carbon  flux and relative  
net carbon  flux, the no tillage  will give you the negative  result  that means  it will help in 
negative  carbon  flux and will help in carbon  sequestration.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  28:06)  
 
We can also see in case of a long term agricultural  practice with no tillage  and conventional  
tillage.  If we compare them , we can see that a carbon  soil carbon  stock  was higher  with no 
tillage  practice  rather  than conventional  practice.  So, you can see this is the no tillage  
practice.  So, after 21 years  of no tillage  practice,  they showed higher  carbon  concentration  
than the conventional  tillage  practice.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  28:36)  
 We can also see the effect  of organic  amendments  to enhance soil organic  carbon  and carbon  
sequestration.  Then  chemical  fertilizer  we can compare.  These  are showing the carbon  
sequestration  by NPK  fertilizer , vermicompost , FYM, BS, SPMC.  So, these  SPMC  stands  for 
sulphit ation  press mud cake.  So, these  are different  types  of organic  amendments.  So, when  
we apply these organic  amendments,  these  BS stands  for biogas  slurry , FYM is farmyard  
manure  and then VC is the vermicompost.  So, all these  different  types  of organic  products  
application  has increased  the carbon  sequestration then the NPK chemical  fertilizer  based  
application  in case of sugarcane.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  29:29)  
 
Also  you can soil organic  carbon  turnover  and sequestrati on rate in long term experiment.  We 
can see that in case of long term experiment  of 32 years,  the soil organic  carbon  turnover  and 
sequestration  rate in rice-rice, so, these  red bars are showing the rice-rice system,  sorry,  rice-
wheat  system,  and these  blue bars are showing the maize- wheat  system  of a tropical,  semi 
arid region of Punjab  and we can see that wheat  there are different  types  of treatment  they 
have  used like farmyard,  FYM stands  for the farmyard  manure  and then N 120 stands  for the 
application  of 120 kg of N.  
Then N nitrogen 120 kg N, 30 kg P 2 O 5, then nitrogen 120 kg P 2 O 5, 30 kg K 2 O then 30 
kg. So, for all these  we can see the higher  soil organic  carbon sequestr ation  that can be 
obtained in FYM. Also we can see annual  crop residue  carbon  input  in different  rain fed crop 
production system  of India . We can see in case of soyabean  saflower  system  we can have  
highest  crop residue  carbon  input  in mega gram  per hectare or tonne  per hectare.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  30:53)  
 
Also  if you see the popular  based  intercropping system,  this can reduce more  carbon  dioxi de 
concentration  compared  to sole croppi ng system.  So, if we see the sole wheat  and wheat  
under  poplar  and poplar,  so, we can see that carbon  dioxide  assimilation  will be carbon  
dioxide  assimilation  in case a poplar plus wheat  is showing the higher  trend.  So, projected  
carbon  dioxide  assimilation  in poplar  based  agri-silvicultural system.  This basically  shows 
the projected  carbon  dioxide  assimilation  poplar  based agri-silviculture  system  on biophysical  
basis.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  31:35)  
 
Also we can see the cover  crops  can also greatly  add carbon  to soil. So, here you can see with 
cowpea,  this is before  cowpea and after cowpea and before  cowpea,  after cowpea at different  depths  and you can see soil organic  carbon  pools , for rapeseed , rice rapeseed  cropping  
system.  So, you can see after you incorporate  the cowpea cover  crop that will increase the 
soil organic  carbon  pools.   
Also these  were rice rapeseed  system  and you can see that effect  of cowpea cover  crop 
inclusion rice rapeseed  cropping system  on carbon  sequestration.  So, this is the soil organic  
carbon  pools  and this is a carbon  sequestration . You can see before  cowpea and after cowpea,  
the carbon  sequestration  has changed  drastically.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  32:26)  
 
So, what  are the challenges  of carbon  sequestration  in soils?  First of all, measurement  and 
verification.  So, the stock  of carbon  in soil is difficult,  time consuming and expensive  to 
measure.  Secondly,  sequestered  carbon  exist  in the soil in different  pools,  which  are passive , 
active or slow  in nature.   
Then  there is non-permanence of the sequester  carbon.  They are not stayed  for a long time. 
Separation  is another  issue.  So, it is very difficult  to isolate  and differentiate  the portion  of 
carbon  sequestered  in the soil as a result  of management  activities.  And then there  are 
alternate competing demands  of the farm  inputs  are there.   
So, and finally,  the rate of mineralization  is higher  and rate of humidification  is low in the 
tropics.  So, the rate of mineralization  is higher  that means,  decomposition rate will be higher  
and humification  rate is low in the tropics.  So, that is another  important  issue. Alternate  
competing demands  of the farm  inputs  is another  important  issue,  which  is diverting these  farm  inputs  to other  purposes  and thereby rendering the soil devoid  of organic  carbon.  So, 
these  are some  of the practical  challenges  of carbo n sequestra tion in Indian  soils.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  33:46)  
 
What are the benefits  of carbon  sequestration?  Of course,  it has shown to improve  the soil 
quality  through enhance fertility,  soil structure  and aggregate stability.  It has increased  the 
soil water  holding capacity,  it increased  the capacity  to reduce the toxic  elements  from  the 
soil. It has sown  to reduce the soil erosion and also it is known to increase the crop 
production.  So, all these  together  will address  to achieve the global  food security.  So, these  
are some  of the benefits  of carbon  sequestration.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  34:24)  
 So, summary  we can see that biosequestration  of carbon both by soil as well as biota  is a truly 
win-win situation.  And soil carbon  sequestration  is desirable both for its benefi cial effects  on 
greenhouse  gas emission  and greenhouse  gas reduction  and climate  change  and conservation 
agriculture  practices  and their promotion need  higher  priority.   
Efforts  are needed  to create large scale awareness  against  burning of crop residues,  both in 
irrigated  and in rain fed agriculture  and link between  soil carbon  sequestration  in world  food 
security  on the one hand and climate  change  on the other  hand,  neither  be over emphasized  or 
nor ignored.  So, these  are some  of the salient  points  from  this whole  discussion  on carbon  
sequestration.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  35:21)  
 
 So, guys,  these  are the references  which  are used for this lecture.  And please go to this lecture  
to gather  more  knowledge  on carbon  sequestration.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  35:32)  
 
So, thank you. Let us meet  in our next lecture  to discuss other  issues,  other  environmental  
issues which  are related  to nutrient  management  and agricultural  production.  Thank  you.  