Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Prof essor  Somsubha Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of T echnology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture 55  
Fertilizer Recommendation Approaches and Integrated Plant Nutrient Management 
(Contd.)  
 
Welcome friends , to this fifth lecture of week 11 of NPTEL Online Certification Course of 
Soil Fertility and Fertilizers . In our previous lectures of this week,  we have discussed about 
different yield concept . We have also discussed about different types of nutrie nt 
recommendation practices , starting from  the generalized practice as well as soil test -based  
recommendation , and then STCR approach .  
We have discussed in details about the benefits and some issues regarding the STCR 
approach , we have seen some Ready  Reckoner  for application of different fertilizer , for 
different crops in different locations . And we have also discussed in details about site specific 
nutrient management . Now, in this lecture we are going to discuss the integrated nutrient 
management in det ails. 
(Refer Slide Time: 1:18)  
 
And then,  we are going to also discuss about the objectives of balanced nutrition and effect of 
different long term fertilizer treatments on soil chemical properties , soil physical properties . 
And then,  effect of long- term treatment on soil physical properties also . So, these are the 
concepts which we are going to discuss in this lecture . (Refer Slide Time: 1:45)  
 
And these are some of the keywords like  INM, balance nutrition, INM determinants , 
microbial inoculant , biochem ical changes , so these are some of the keywords for this lecture .  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:55)  
 
Now, we have already  discussed about  INM previously,  but let us summarize those things  
again , so that we can connect the benefits of  INM which we have seen in dif ferent case 
studies . You know that  INM basically defines as the maintenance of soil fertility and plant 
nutrient supply to an optimum level for sustaining the desired crop productivity through 
optimization of the benefits from all possible optimize of all possible sources of plant 
nutrients in an integrated manner . So, as per the definition, INM maintains the soil fertility and plant nutrient supply in 
optimum level , through application of different forms of plant nutrients , from different , not 
only differe nt forms from different sources of the plant nutrients . For example , here you can 
see inorganic fertilizers  is a component of  INM, organic manure is a component of  INM, then 
green manure is a component of INM  and bio fat laser is another component of  INM.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:27)  
 
Now, the concept of  INM says that , it using  INM you can regulate nutrient supply for 
optimum crop growth and higher productivity.  You can improve and maintain the soil 
fertility . And you can ensure  zero adverse impact on agro -ecoregion quality by balanced 
fertilization of organic manures , inorganic fertilizers , and bio inoculants .  
So, these are the major concepts or major , I would say the assumptions of in implementing 
the INM . First of all,  you have to regulate the nutrient supply for optimum  crop growth and 
higher productivity , then you have to improve and maintain the soil fertility and finally at the 
same time you have to ensure that there is no detrimental impact on the ecosystem by 
ensuring a balanced fertilization of consis ting of different sources of the nutrients like bio 
fertilizers,  like organic manure , like inorganic fertilizers . (Refer Slide Time: 4:46)  
 
Now, what are the determinants of  INM ? first of all nutrient requirement of cropping system 
as a whole is the majo r determinant , then soil fertility status and special management needs to 
overcome the soil problems . If any third is local availability of nutrient resources like organic 
inorganic and biological sources , fourth one is economic condition of farmers and 
profitability a proposed INM  option . Fifth one is social acceptability , sixth one is ecological 
consideration and seventh one is impact on the environment , so these are some of the 
important determinants of the  INM . 
Again, the nutrient requirement of cropping system as a whole should be considered for 
integrated nutrient management , then soil fertility status , and if the soil is having any  
unfavourable condition like acidity,  alkalinity , if any , that has to be also taken care of . And 
then, local availability of the nutrient resources not only formulating the balanced nutrition,  
but formulating the balanced nutrition using the locally available resources is the major 
thrust . 
Then economic condition of the farmers and profitability of proposed INM  option,  this is 
very important unless there is profit from the proposed solution that will not  attract a large 
number of farmers . Then society , you know social acceptability is an important issue , then 
ecological considerations and of course finally impact on the environments these are the major determinants of  INM . (Refer Slide Time: 6:47)  
 
Now, what are the components of INM?  If you see the components of the INM,  first of all is 
soil resource . Basically , in using the soil source , we have to mobilize unavailable nutri ents 
and to use appropriate crop varieties , and then cultural practices and cropping system . For 
example,  we can integrate the pulse crop in the cropping system just to supply the nitrogen,  
then the mineral fertilizer like super granules , coated urea,  direct use of locally available rock 
phosphate in acid soils , then single super phosphate , muriate  of potash,  and micronutrient 
fertilizers . 
Then organic sources like by- products of farming and allied industries , then fermion yield 
manure , droppings , crop wast e, residues , sewage,  sludge , industrial waste , all these are 
different types of organic sources . And bio biological resources or bio fertilizers like 
microbial inoculants , which can substitute for 15  to 40 kg of nitrogen per hectare . So, you can 
see not only the soil source where we are managing the soil available nutrients and also,  we 
are managing the cultural practices , we are we are also integrating the mineral fertilizer 
organic sources and biological sources or bio fertilizers , so these are important components of 
INM.  (Refer Slide Time: 8:07)  
 
So, if you see the organic inputs  compost and vermicompost , then fermion manure , then 
waste from agro based industries , then crop waste , urban and rural solid and liquid waste , 
piggery manure , and poultry manu re, all these are different types of organic inputs or source 
of organic manure in the integrated nutrient management concept . 
(Refer Slide Time: 8:30)  
 
Now, government India has started schemes like balanced and integrated use of fertilizer with 
the aim of promoting the use of organic manures and biofertilizers . Now, the scheme is also 
designed to encourage the processing and production of compost from urban waste and 
biofertilizers . (Refer Slide Time: 8:55)  
 
 
Now, we have seen some basic info about  INM, let us see some long- term effect of balanced 
nutrient management . So, we know that the impact of balanced fertilization on soil health can 
improve the soil health , that also can improve the plant health and intern that again help the 
human health.  So, these are the different steps of improvement or the different steps of 
harnessing the benefits from balanced fertilization , which can help to augment the soil health,  
and then in turn it also improves  the plant health and human health.  (Refer Slide Time: 9 :50) 
 
Now, if you recall the balanced nutrition,  balance nutrition refers to application of essential 
plant nutrients in optimum quantity,  and in right proportion to correct method and time of 
application suited for a specific crop,  soil crop climate situ ation . Remember that 4R  nutrient 
stewardship ? So this balanced nutrition is a key component to increase the yield and quality 
of produce , maintenance of soil productivity,  soil health , and protection of environment . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:25)  
 
Then, let us  see the major objectives of balance nutrition . First of all , to reduce the gap 
between nutrient used and nutrient harvested,  if we maintain the , if we can reduce the gap 
between nutrient used and nutrient harvested,  then we can save the nutrient and this can be 
only achieved through balanced nutrition.  Secondly,  we can also improve the physical chemical and biological properties of the soil . Thirdly,  we can make our soil healthy by 
providing balanced nutrition . Fourth , we can reduce the yield effects of th e continuous use of 
major nutrients , so if we use the continuously some major nutrients only some major 
nutrients without adding the additional sources of nutrients , then that can reduce the native 
soil fertility , and finally to increase the fertilizer use  efficiency and improve economic status 
of the farmer , so these are the major objectives of balanced nutrition . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:35)  
 
Now, if we see the effect of continuous application of fertilizer lime and i f I am on soil 
properties after harvest of mix , this is a case study  published by Kumar et al.,  in 2009,  we can 
see there are different  treatment , and we can see when there is a T2, which is  nitrogen based 
treatment , where available phosphate was highest , and when we apply,  they applied the tree  
five T5, that is NPK plus li me, they got the highest available potassium , and then highest 
exchangeable calcium , and then highest exchangeable magnesium , highest exchangeable 
magnesium , and when they have used the FYM  in combination with phosphorous and 
potassium , they got the highest  organic carbon,  and also they got the highest available 
sulphur . 
So, this shows the continuous application of fertilizer  lime and FYM , so here you can see,  
when you are applying not only the fertilizer but also lime as an ame ndment , that how they 
can improve the soil chemical properties . And also, here you can see we are applying the 
FYM  plus phosphorous and potassium , so this combination of nutrients or integrated nutrient , 
they can improve the soil chemical properties . (Refer Slide Time: 13:06)  
 
Similarly , you can see here,  this is an effect of  INM  on CEC after harvest of maize and 
wheat . You can see when they are applying FYM  at 10 ton per hectare,  plus 100 percent of 
NPK,  then for wheat they are getting the high CEC , that is 18.28 centimole  P plus per kg,  and 
for maize also they are getting high CEC.   
When they are applying 100  percent NPK plus FYM at 10 ton per hectare,  then you know the 
earlier in T 6 of course 100 percent NPK minus NPK content of FYM was applied , howeve r 
in T 7, 100 percent in N PK plus FYM , you know here you can see it at 10  percent per 
hectare, they are also getting higher a high CEC  for both the crops , and in case of T8 when 
you are applying the FYM at 20 ton per hectare , there we are also getting the high wheat and 
maize yield . 
Maize,  you know  CEC,  in case of wheat and maize , after their harvest , so that shows that 
how INM can improve the soil fertility properties . CEC is an important soil fertility property , 
indicator of the soil fertility status , so you can see with the application of FYM , how these 
CEC can be improved . (Refer Slide Time: 14:37)  
 
Also, if we can see the effect of fertilizer treatments on copper availability in soil after 10 
years of intensive cropping,  you can see that when we are adding these NPK plus FYM , that 
is showing the highest yield followed by NPK plus zinc , and then NPK,  NK, N  and, so on , so 
NPK here the recommended dose was 120- 40-40, and then zinc sulphate was applied at 10 kg 
per hectare,  and FYM was applied as 510 per hectare.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:13)  
 
Now, you are you can also see the effect of fertilizer treatments on INM  availability in soil 
after 10 years of intensive cropping , published by seeing it all in 1999 , when in P antnagar , we 
can see that when we are apply ing the NPK plus FYM combination that is showing the 
highest soil DTP A extracted  Fe, so that means the micronutrient content is also in increasing , when we are getting the , when we are applying the fertilizer , inorganic fertilizer in 
combination with organic resources . So, this is an another example of improvement of soil 
fertility status for long term trial, using,  in case of intensive cropping,  using  balanced 
fertilizer or integrated nutrient management, okay.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:08)  
 
Now, again if you  see the soil chemical properties of the twentieth rice crop of ra bi season , 
we can see then when we are applying the NPK plus green  manure plus gypsum , the 
Natarajan  et al.,  2006 , they have got the optimum pH  as well as the highest organic carbon 
content . They got the organic carbon content of  using this combination of inorganic fertilizer , 
then green manure and soil amendment like gypsum . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:48)  
 Also, in this  graph we can see the effect of green manure and FYM on soil properties in ri ce 
with cropping sequence in calculus soil , which is a mean of six years , so you can see that this 
is the pH  trend this shows the organic carbon train and this is the electrical conductivity 
trend , We can see that T 1  is 100 percent NPK control , and T 2 is 100 percent NPK plus 
Sunhem p incorporation every year , T 3 is 100  percent NPK plus Sunhem p incorporation in 
the alternate year , T4 is the 100  percent NPK plus doing chain corporation every year , so you 
can see that when we are applying this T 4, it is imp roving the soil organic carbon . 
Similarly , for T8 you can also see that the high  when there is an application of 100 percent 
NPK plus green gram plus 5 ton of FYM  every year , we are also getting higher organic 
carbon and lower pH.  So, I mean somewhat lower  pH than the T 7, so this is showing the 
temporal  you know treatment wise changes of soil properties in a rice sweet cropping 
sequence by application of different combination of nutrients . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:15)  
 
Then, we can see the effect of continuo us use of fertilizers and manures in cotton wheat 
rotation on  permanent wilting point and then fill capacity or burn density of soil , so we can 
see here published by Mathur et al.,  in nineteen , method in 1997 , so here you can see when 
there is a 100  percen t nitrogen,  whatever we are getting , we when we are applying 15 percent 
FYM plus 15 percent NPK , we are getting more you know PWP we can see here,  the PWP is 
highest in case of 100 percent FYM followed by the  50 percent FYM  plus 50 percent NPK,  
followed by 100 percent NP. 
So, and also the field capacity is  you know  generally is  same for 100 percent nitrogen , 100 
percent NP, and then 100 percent FYM . The lowest we can be found  in case of 50  percent FYM  plus 50 percent NPK. H owever , bulk density is also similar almost , however , 
comparatively when we are seeing the FYM, 100  percent FYM,  and when there is an FYM  
plus 50 percent NPK,  50 percent FYM  plus 50 percent NPK,  we can see the lower levels of 
bulk density which is favourable soil physical condition.  
(Refer  Slide Time: 19:52)  
 
We can also see the effect of fertilizers , FYM  and biofertilizers on phosphorus solubilizing 
bacteria,  and azotobacter population count in rhizosphere , when we can see that you know in 
different conditions , we are getting the higher a mount of PSB and 100 percent of nitrogen 
phosphorus potassium and sulphur , you can see that  we are getting the highest PSB content 
and or colony forming unit , and then for also Azotobacter  column is also . 
When we are applying the  FYM , that is 10- ton FYM per hectare,  we are getting more than 
the NPK application that is 10.64 and 10 you know here in case of PSB , we are getting 10.64,  
however , in case of Azotobacter, there is somewhat reduction . In case of bio fertilizers  
application,  we can see that PSB plus isotope vector can show higher  you know population 
count and also Azotobacter  can show the higher population count as compared to no bio 
fertilizer , PSB and Azotobacter , so the combination always shows here the better results . 
Similarly , here also when the re is a no  FYM and 10-ton FYM , 10-ton FYM is already 
producing better results . Similarly , here also you can see when we are applying the NPKS in 
combination we are getting the higher  you know population count for both PSB and 
Azotobacter.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:25)  
 
Then you can see the effect of long- term treatments on soil physical properties after 30 years , 
31 years of cropping.  So, here you can see when  100 percent NPK plus FYM was applied , 
bulk density was reduced and, so bulk density is lowest in thi s condition , and also hydraulic 
conductivity is highest , that is point 80 millimetre per hour .  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:53)  
 
So, balance nutrition  nutrient application for a number of soil crop combination of India , if 
you want to see that , there are differ ent situation like many alluvial soils in wheat belt, there 
are different components of balance like NPK , zinc,  and sulphur , in case of red and 
electrolytic soils NPK with lime, and then many areas under oil seed NPKS and boron . In case of Maln ad areas of Karnataka N, P, K,  sulphur and magnesium , and high link tea in 
south we can see NPK magnesium , sulphur , and zinc.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:29)  
 
We can also see effect of continuous fertilization on soil physical properties , so when we are 
applying this 10- ton FYM  per hectare then you can see that hydraulic conductivity is 
increasing , then bulk density is decreasing,  and also water holding capacity is increasing, so 
that shows the effect of  you know addition of different types of  organic amendment or 
organic c omponent in the soil  on the soil  physical properties . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:05)  
 
We can also see long term effect of FYM and fertilizer on infiltration rate , if you can see here 
when we are applying the FYM at 25 ton per hectare,  it is in case of control it is  0 point 515, in case of FYM 25 ton per hectare , 0.65 and then  that in the second year , in the first year you 
can see 0.434 , and then in each year if we apply then you will get that  0 point 484, 4648, 0 
point 648. So, this is how you can see the effec t of FYM and fertilizer on infiltration rate . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:49)  
 
Annual rate of build- up of oxidizable and non- oxidizable soc in soil profile under different 
fertilizer and manure treatment , you can see there is a control and when we are applying the 
combination of NPK and plus  FYM , we can see both oxidizable and non- oxidizable organic 
carbon the cumulatively it is increasing . 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:11)  
 
So, as a summary , we can see that you know the long- term fertility experiments being carried 
out in various agroecological regions have amply demonstrated that neither chemical fertilizer nor organic manure alone can sustain the crop production in soil fertility. H owever , 
conjoint use of fertilizer manures would not only impart sustenance to the production but also 
improve soils physical chemical and biological properties . So, INM appears to be the most 
potential and promising strategy for realizing and sustaining crop productivity and soil health.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:54)  
 
We also know that organi c and inorganic fertilizers provide balanced nutrition to crop 
increasing crop yield and quality,  and it also improves soil physical chemical and biological 
properties on a sustainable basis , applying fertilizer in conjunction with organics in is in a 
balanced form is necessary for maintaining the soil fertility and crop productivity under 
intensive cropping.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:22)  
 What are the future needs ? So we need to identify the limiting nutrients in order of priority 
for important crops under di fferent agroecological regions , there is a need for studies on 
biochemical changes due to imbalance or balanced nutrition in physiology of different crop.  
There is a need for developing suitable technology involving different organics to improve 
nutrient use efficiency for crops under intensive cropping,  and also there is a need for 
development of location and crop specific nutrients enrich organics for balanced nutrition of 
different crops . So, this is these are the future needs . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26: 06) 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 26:27)  
 
 
And these are the references which  I have used for this lecture . These are the different 
different  research papers and published research papers which  I have used for  showing you 
this case studies . So, you are welcome to g o through these research papers to enrich yourself , 
and if you have any queries,  please let me know . 
And let us wrap up this  this week of lectures , so we have wrapped up this week 11 of 
lectures , let us meet in week 12 of lectures  to discuss more about soi l fertility and fertilizers . 
Thank you.  