Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Prof essor  Somsubha Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of T echnology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture 53  
Fertilizer Recommendation Approaches and Integrated Plant Nutrient Management 
(Contd.)  
 
Welcome friends , to this new lecture of week 11 of the NPTEL Online Certification Course 
of Soil Fertility and Fertilizers . And we are currently at lecture number 53,  and in this week 
11, we are discussing fertilizer recommendation approaches and integrated nutrie nt 
management . In the previous two lectures of this week,  we have discussed the potential 
concept , the attainable  yield concept , and actual concept , and also, we have discussed or 
summarized the salient features of different  soil testing or soil fertility evaluation methods . 
We have discussed the demerits of depending only on visual deficiency symptoms . We have 
discussed also the plant tissue testing salient points , how to do,  what are the salient steps of 
plant tissue testing . And then,  we have also discus sed the biological test method for soil 
fertility evaluation . And finally,  we have also discussed about the soil testing methods , we 
have summarized those methods which are commonly used for available macro and 
micronutrients and also for the  soil conditions or soil  like, whether our soil is saline , alkaline 
or acidic,  we have discussed . 
And then,  we have discussed different types of methods for interpretation, so of soil test 
values . What are the ranges of the soil test values in the low , medium , and high category ? 
And, so and then recommendation approaches , we have discussed . Now, we are going to 
continue from there when we get to see some of the interpretation and recommendation approaches . We are going to,  also we are going to discuss the base percentage yield against 
extractable soil nutrient . We are going to discuss the critical soil test level approach . Then, 
critical limits of plant nutrient elements . (Refer Slide Time: 2:30)  
 
And then,  soil analysis crop correlation approach , and finally we are goi ng to discuss the 
targeted yield Concepts . So, these are the concepts which you are going to cover in this 
lecture.   
(Refer Slide Time: 2:43)  
 
These are some of the keywords like percentage of yield , critical limit , response curve , plant 
nutrient elements , and fertilizer recommendations , so these are some of the keywords for this 
lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 2:56)  
 
Now, while discussing the soil test interpretation and recommendation , we have also 
discussed the , we have discussed the generalized approach , we have discussed the  soil test-
based  approach , now let us discuss the Colwell’s approach.  This approach is  also known as 
deductive ; it utilizes the natural variation in soil fertility for calibrating soil test values . In this 
approach , multiplication trials are carried out with the same set of treatments and the 
responses are then fitted in the fertilizer prescription models . 
Why we call it  as a Colwell’s approach ? Because Colwell’s in 1950- 67 developed this 
approach on the basis that some variables which affect the response of crop to fertilizer , if 
omitted from the correlation between  soil test and crop response led to poor correlation.  So, 
this is called Colwell’s approach and we can see why this is also known as deductive 
approach . Because here we are deducing,  we are deducting some of the variables which can 
affect the response of the crop to fertilizer which will ultimately impact the correlation 
between soil test and crop response . 
Remember , that this approach is based on simple field trials and aver aging the results . And it 
can it include s all the variable that can affect the fertilizer requirements . So, these are some of 
the salient features of Colwell’s approach . (Refer Slide Time: 4:50)  
 
The next approach is percentage of yield maximum approach . So, basically an empirical 
relationship between percentile and soil and fertilizer nutrient is developed,  and this is 
commonly known as Mi tscherlich and Bray approach . An empirical relationship is developed 
between percentile,  soil test,  and fertilizer maximum yield . However , it is not very much 
favoured,  since it assumes a hypothetical maximum yield . So, this is , these are some of the 
salient features of percent of  yield maximum approach . 
(Refer Slide Time: 5:31)  
 
The next approach is critical soil test level approach . Here, in this approach a response curve 
is fitted by conducting field experiments based on soil test data and critical levels of nutrients . 
And it does not provide info on how much fertilizer must be adjusted for varying soil test value , below and above the critical level , so this is the major drawback of this critical soil test 
level approach . This is , again this approach basically fits a response curve , a plant yield or 
percentage of plant yield by conducting field experiment based on soil  test data and critical 
levels of nutrients . However , the major drawback is it does not provide any info on how 
much fertilizer adjustment need to be done , used to be done , below and above the critical 
level . 
(Refer Slide Time: 6:39)  
 
Now, how to determine the critical limit?  So, the critical limit of any nutrient in soil and plant 
was determined by plotting base percentage yield against extractable soil nutrient and plant 
tissue , nutrient concentration.  Now,  using the procedure of Cate and  Nelson , so base  percent 
yield , let us see base percent yield , how to calculate base percent yield . So, base percent yield 
of the crop was calculated by using the formula , where base percentage will be basically the 
multiplication of yield without fertilizer treatment,  and then yield at Optimum fertilizer 
treatment multiplied by 100. S o, yield without fertilizer treatment by yield at Optimum 
fertilizer treatment multiplied by 10, so this is how we calculate the base percentage yield . (Refer Slide Time: 7:34)  
 
Now, instea d of grouping the soil into , so now we are doing the soil test analysis , soil 
analysis for determining the available nutrients . And then,  we are plotting the available 
nutrients in the x -axis and y- axis, we are putting the percentage yield . So, instead of grouping 
the soil into three or more classes , one critical value is been fixed . Now, in case of soil test -
based  approach , we remember that we have this low , medium , and high . However , here we 
are grouping them into two classes , that is vertical and horizontal and , that is responsive and 
non-responsive . 
Now, in this graphical technique you can see vertical and horizontal lines are superimposed 
on a scattered diagram . So, this is basically scatter diagram between available nutrients and 
percentile.  So, here t his vertical and horizontal lines are superimposed, so that there are 
maximum numbers of observation in the upper right hand,  and lower right hand.  Now, the 
point where the vertical line insects , the x -axis is termed as the critical  you know limit , so this  
is the critical limit.  
So, the response is expected , when fertilizer is applied in soils , having soil test values below 
critically , so we can see that below this critical limit,  if we apply the fertilizer, we will get 
crop response , so this is the definition of critical limit . Now, in this critical limit , we are 
basically dividing the data into responsive and non- responsive , so basically below the critical 
limit,  the data become responsive , above the critical limit the data become non responsive , 
below it become responsive . 
Now, if soil is low to medium in nutrient status , apply recommended dose of fertilizer , and on 
high status apply a half dose of recommendations . So, generally it is says that when the soil belongs to this medium and you know low to medium in nutrient status , generally it is 
recommended to apply a recommended dose of fertilizer , and on high status , when it is in 
high status a half dose of recommended,  half of the recommended doses applied should be 
applied , and the main disadvantage of thi s approach is that it cannot give any idea about how 
much fertilizer is to be added . So, this is how  this critical limit approach works . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:27)  
 
If we go ahead and see the actual grab between the soil test level and percentage yield , we 
can see this graph looks like this , and here you can see after this the graph , so the graph is 
increasing with increasing soil test level  from very low , to low , to medium , to high , so you 
can see with the increase in soil test level , the percentage yield is increasing at higher rate,  
and then their rate of increase is slow down , is slowing down,  and then they are reaching a 
plateau . And after certain higher level of soil  concentration,  which we call excessive amount , 
then we will see again that shows the d etrimental effect . 
So, if we draw a vertical line this will consider as the critical limit . And here , we can see this 
is the maximum yield and this is basically the economic Optimum yield , so this is a 
maximum yield where we can see per 100 percentile and economic Optimum value we are 
getting here when the yield may be 95 percent . So here,  in this Zone from high to very high,  
it is suggested that we should apply the maintenance fertilizer , and beyond this very high , we 
should not apply any fertilizer . And below these  you know in this Zone we should apply 
build up plus maintenance fertilizer , so this is how we should use the critical limits of 
available nutrients in the soil to identify the z one where we should apply the fertilizer the 
crop. (Refer Slide Time: 12:28)  
 
 
So, let us see some examples , here you can see that the base  percentage yield at particle 
initiation stage of rise and here you can see hot calcium chloride extractable boron in PPM , 
so that shows this  scatter plot , and if we can draw this ve rtical and horizontal line we can see 
this is a critical limit can be seen using this vertical line where , which is intercepting the x 
axis and , so we can clearly see that somewhere in between 0.4 to 0.6 PPM , the critical limit 
of boron is there . Then, if you see the critic, you know  break percentage yield of grain , we 
can see that here the critical limit is basically  around 0.6 PPM . (Refer Slide Time: 13:36)  
 
Now, interpretation of the results from the critical limit approach , the basis for you know , if 
we consider the interpretation of the particular limit approach,  the basis for plant analysis as a 
diagnostic technique is the relationship between nutrient concentration in the plant and 
growth and production response , we know that . So, this relation shou ld be significant to have 
complete interpretation in terms of deficient adequate and excess nutrient concentration in the plant . 
Now, carbs representing the relationship between nutrient concentration and growth response 
vary in shape and character dependi ng on the nutrient concentration in the growth medium 
and data plant species , we see that in details in this  chart . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:25)  
 So, when nutrients are in deficiency range plant growth and illness significantly reduced and 
foliar deficiency symptoms occur , we know that . Now, in this range application of nutrient 
results in sharp increase in the growth , so below the critical nutrient level if we apply the 
fertilizer , we will see the sharp increase in the growth .  
Now, in marginal range growth or yield is reduced but plant does not show any deficiency 
symptom . Sometimes , the marginal range is also known as the transition zone , within the 
marginal or transition zone , the critical level or concentration lies . So, the critical level can be 
defined as the concentration at which growth or yield begins to decline significantly,  we 
know that . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:09)  
 
So, here you can see nutrient concentration in plants , so there are different zones , like 
deficiency Zone , marginal zones , adequate Zon e, excess Zone,  and toxic zones , we know that 
toxic zones , critical toxicity limit,  and critical deficiency values are there.  Based on this Zone , 
we can see in which category the nutrient concentration is there.  So, if we go back and see 
these very low , so this is a deficiency Zone and this is a  medium or marginal Zone , and then 
as we move in this x- axis, we can see the high vary in  x-axis, Zone which can create a 
nutrient toxicity .  
So similarly , here also we can see here deficiency Zone , then marginal Zone , then adequate 
Zone , axis Zone , and oxy zone , so if we go , if we see that  this marginal range is also known 
as the transition zone , so within this marginal or transition zone , the critical level of 
concentration line . So, here we can see the critical con centration , we remember this is a critical concentration , 
and then the critical you know  and below , and when we go further down in the in the x- axis, 
we can see the deficient Zone where severe deficiency of the crop growth can be seen . 
(Refer Slide Time: 1 6:27)  
 
So, the critical level of nutrient Supply  below which the appreciable growth depression due to 
deficiency appears are referred to as a threshold of deficiency . Now, we can see here this is 
the you know threshold of deficiency, so below that point w e will see the  deficiency of the 
crop. Now, the critical level of supply above which the growth depression due to toxicity 
occurs is referred as the threshold of toxicity.  So, the critical levels and the limits of 
deficiency toxicity and Optimum growth var y with the genotype and are profoundly affected 
by plant metabolism . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 17:14)  
 
Now, if we see the another approach that is called soil analysis crop correlation approach.  In 
This approach a group of soils ranging in fertility from high to low in respect of a particular 
nutrient are considered . Now, it forms and this approach forms the basis of formulating the 
fertilizer recommendation based on yield targets , so here we are considering the yield target 
for identification of the fertilizer  recommendation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:47)  
 
Now, this approach is better than others , whatever we have discussed like Colwell’s 
approach , then you know base  percentage yield approach , then critical level approach , but 
this approach is basically this soil analysis crop correlation approach is basically superior 
than those , because fertility is the recommendation is based on a relative contribution of soil and fertilizer . And farmers have the options to relate their resources with a desired level of  
yield Target. It can offer  the balance fertilization to maintain the soil fertility and fertilizer 
use efficiency is higher as it takes care of soil and fertilizer nutrient interactions . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:34)  
 
So, this is why  this concept of  soil test crop re sponse is superior to other  recommendation 
approach . Now, in the target yield concept , there is a balance between fertilizing the crop and 
fertilizing the soil,  of course we have to maintain some balance.  Now, it is assumed that there 
is a linear relations hip between grain yield and nutrient uptick by the crop we know that .  
There is a linear relationship between the growth of the plant and the nutrient uptake by the 
crop and grain yield . And the nutrient requirement of the crop for a given yield level is 
worked out , and the contribution from soil available nutrient is then calculated,  and the 
fertilizer needed is estimated , so these are the step by step  you know operation in this target  
yield concept . (Refer Slide Time: 19:29)  
 
Now, this targeted approach  was first developed by trug in 1960 and Ramamurthy at all in 
1974,  established the theoretical basis and experimental techniques to suit it into Indian 
condition.  And this whole Target will concept or approach is based on principles of living's 
law of min imum,  we have discussed this several time limit lock minimum, so I am not going 
to discuss them further , discuss it further . And here , in this targeting approach , we assume a 
linear relationship between Green Lane nutrient uptake by the crop , I have alread y told you . 
Now, for obtaining a particle particular yield , the plant must take up a definite amount of 
nutrient . Now, this target equation is considered as a soil and fertilizer -based  Precision 
farming strategy to meet nutrient demands for specific yield . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:25)  
 Now, what are the parameters for this targeted equation ? So first one is NR which is the 
nutrient requirement , in kg per quintal of produce , which may be either grain or other 
economic Parts , CS stands for the percent contribut ion from the soil available nutrients to 
Total uptake . And CF is fractional recovery of the applied fertilizer nutrient , so field 
experiment data is needed that provide a range in soil test values , nutrient uptake , and yield  
levels which enables calculatin g these basic parameters . And then,  fertility gradient 
experiment also need to be done prior to the experiment with the test crop artificially creates 
the desired variability . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:13)  
 
So, what are the objectives and methodology of ferti lity gradient experiments ? So objective 
of fertility gradient experiment is to or to reduce the heterogeneity in soil population or type 
studied,  management practices adopted , and climatic condition . What is the method here , a 
field representative of the m ajor soil type of the region and having the low soil fertility level 
is basically selected and divided into four equal strips ? 
Now, the area is divided along the width into four equal strips , now the area is divided along 
the width selected and divided int o four equal strips . Now, the area is divided along the width 
now four fertilizer schedules , such as N0,  P0, K0, that means we do not apply any fertilizer , 
then half of N,  half of P , half of K , so we can see that  NPK  half of recommended rows , and 
then full  recommended dose of NPK and two  I is the recommended dose of NP K are applied 
to the four strips . And then , an exhaustive short duration crop generally further crop is grown 
in the area and after harvest of the gradient crop , the variability in the soil fe rtility developed 
in the experimental site is recorded . So, we first develop the strips of the land having the , first select this soil with the low fertility 
level and then divide into four equal strips , and then area is divided into along the width into 
four equal strips , and then we apply four fertilizer schedules , no fertilizer , half of the 
recommended dose , full recommended dose , and then double up the recommended use , and 
then an exhaustive short duration crop is grown in the area . And after harvest of  the gradient 
crop the variability in the soil fertility developed in the experimental site is recorded . Now, 
the field is ready for the experiment with the test crop . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:06)  
 
 
So, we can see here you know there are different strips , strip1, strip2, strip3 and strip4 for 
kharif rice, for this , so fertility gradient experiment.  And then how to calculate , so the 
nutrient calculation of NPK for grain production , so we can see NR , nutrient requirement is basically we can see here,  the nutri ent requirement is calculated that kg of nutrient per quintal 
of economic produce , and this is calculated by total uptake of nutrient in fertilized plot in 
grain plus straw divided by grain yield in quintal , so this is how we calculate NR.  
How to calculate  the C S? CS is calculated by total uptake in control plots in grain plus straw 
in kg,  divided by soil test values of nutrients in control plots in kg per hectare , multiplied by 
hundred, so this is how we calculate the C S. How to calculate the fractional recovery of the 
applied fertilizer nutrient or CF? T otal uptake of the nutrients in fertilized plot minus soil test 
values in nutrients  in fertilizer treated plot , multiplied by CS , that is contribution of nutrients 
from the soil , divided by amount of fertil izer nutrient applied , multiple by 100 , so this is how 
we calculate the NR, CS,  and CF. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:39)  
 
Now, how to calculate the fertilizer dose?  So, to calculate the fertilizer dose NR  has to be 
multiplied with 100 , multiplied by T , so T is b asically our Target yield , divided by percent of 
CF. So, CF we have already calculated , so once we calculate this NR,  multiplied by 100,  
multiplied by T,  by CF, minus CS into soil test value by CF , so this is how we calculate the 
fertilizer dose which is b asically a constant , which we can be represented by a constant , 
multiplied by yield Target minus , another constant which is B multiplied by soil test values . 
So, this fertilizer requirement can be calculated using an equation , linear equation , so here we 
can multiply a constant with the target yield minus another constant with the soil test value . 
For example , you can see here for fertilizer phosphorus , you can see  this NR minus CF, 
multiplied by T , you can see here minus CS  by CF multiplied by soil phosphorus , we can see 
minus P or Bray of you know  and for you know , all sense P you know , soil phosphorus may be either all since phosphorus or Bray curves phosphorus and then once we calculate this 
fertilizer phosphorus , we just have to multiply it with the 2.25  to get the fertilizer P .25  in kg 
per hectare.  
So, this is how we calculate the NR, CS, CF,  and ultimately the fertilizer dose . And then we 
can convert one fertility you know nutrient to the available form of nutrients , just like here 
FP2,  FP 25,  we can calculate.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:38)  
 
Now, targeted equation used in I and M on integrated nutrient management , we can see, so 
integrated nutrient management already you know that it is a new integrated you know 
nutrient management is concept , where inorganic fertilizers are applied together with Organic 
sources , so here C O is another parameter which is contribution of added organic matter 
towards nutrient Supply . And then CF is the fraction recovery fertilizer nutrient in the 
presence of added organic source.  
So, how to calculate the C O, CO can be calculated by total uptake of nutrient in organic alone 
plot, where only organic application is there , no inorganic application is there , minus soil test 
value of organic matter in in organic plot my multiplied by CS, and then multiply by 100 by 
Am, which is nutrient added through organic matter applied.  So, and then CF you can 
calculate by total uptake of nutrients in in plot minus soil test values in in plot in kg per 
hectare multiplied by CS,  minus Am multiplie d by C O into 100 by fertilizer dose , so this is 
how we calculate the CF  star or fractional recovery of fertilizer nutrient in the presence of 
added organic source . And then fertilizer dose under INM is calculated by using this formula , where NR is 
multiplied by 100,  multiplied by Target yield by percent CF,  minus CS multiplied by soil test 
value by percent CF,  minus percent CO  multiplied by A m by percent CF , so this is how we 
calculate the target , the fertilizer dose for  specific target yield . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:30)  
 
So, ultimately let us see some examples , here you can see some fertilizer nitrogen , here I told 
you that we can calculate using any linear equations , so you can see fertilizer nitrogen , 
fertilizer P 2Phi, fertilizer K2O can be calculated her e, this is soil nitrogen , soil phosphate , 
soil potassium , and this is how you know , this is a table which we generally used  to calculate 
the fertilizer nutrient requirement for a specific Target yield . Here, you can see available 
nutrients are given and then Target yield is given , for two different condition Target till 25 
quintal per hectare,  Target till 30 quintal per hectare and fertilizer neutral requirement are 
given.  (Refer Slide Time: 29:12)  
 
So, here you can see Ready Reckoner for fertilizer presc ription , so here you can see 250 and 
different doses , so if we have the target yield of 25 quintal per hectare , for example if we are 
having the nitrogen,  available nitrogen is 275 , and 10,  and then  150, then if  I have a target 
yield is 25 quintal per hect are, then we should select this 34,  89, 105, NP2, 5K2O  per hectare.  
So similarly , these are Ready Reckoner for fertilizer prescriptions .  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:50)  
 
So, guys , let us wrap up this lecture , I hope that you have  now have some good knowledges 
about this  critical test level approach as well as Colwell’s approach as well as  this soil test 
crop response approach,  how to  calculate different parameters in the soil test crop response 
approach , what are the merits,  how they are superior from other approaches , we have discussed . And then,  I have showed you how to use the target yield to calculate the fertilizer  
nutrients  and, then we can convert it to other forms , like for example fertilizer P to  fertilizer P 
25. So, let us wrap up this lecture , and the se are the references which  I use for this lecture . 
Let us meet in our next lecture to discuss further about soil  fertility and the soil fertility 
recommendation . Thank you.  