Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsub hra Chakraborty  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 06  
Soil Nitrogen for Plant Nutrition  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:20)  
 
Welcome friends to this second wee k of lectures of this NPTEL  online certification course of 
Soil Fertility and Fertilizers . And in this week two we are going to discuss Soil Nitrogen for 
Plant Nutrition . Now, in this week we are going to discuss in details about the importance of 
nitrogen  for soil plant nutrition , for plant nutrition.  
As well as we are going to discuss what are the different processes, which are related to nitrogen 
in the soil, which governs the availability of different nutrients for plants. So, today we are going 
to star t Lecture 6. (Refer Slide Time: 01:01)  
 
And in this Lecture 6 we are going to cover these following concepts . So, first we are going to 
discuss about soil nitrogen and then we are going to discuss about basics nitrogen processes in 
soil and plant system , then we are going to discuss biological nitrogen fixation there  types and 
mechanism and then we are going to discuss sources and forms of soil nitrogen and finally, we 
are going to discuss the tran sformation of organic nitrogen.  
So, all of these are very important specifically the processes which we are going to discuss as 
well as biological nitrogen fixation, they are very much important for governing the nitrogen and 
their different species and their concentration in the s oil plant system.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:58)  
 
So, these are the some of the keywords of this lecture nitrogen cycle , biological nitrogen fixation, 
non biological nitrogen fixation , then nitrogen immobilization and mineralization and finally, 
CN ratio or carbon nitrogen ratio.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 02:12)  
 
So, let us  start with the basic overview of nitrogen . Now, you know that in soil nitrogen exists in 
many different forms , also in the whole environment  it appears in different forms. So, it 
transforms and moves between the atmosphere , biosphere and hydrosphere. So, the nitrogen 
cycle shows alterations more than any other basic elemental cy cle essential to life on Earth.  So, all the cycles of basic elements which are required for sustaining the life on the Earth among 
them nitrogen cycle is  characterized by several mechanisms and several types of alterations or 
changes . And remember that the release of large amount of reactive forms of nitrogen into the 
environment has caused  a sequence of harmful effects.  
So, that is why it is very importan t to have a clear understanding of the nitrogen cycle and the 
different factors which influence the concentration of different n itrogen species in the soil, so  
that we can minimize these harmful effects from the excessive amount of some nitrogen species.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:55)  
 
So, if we go ahead and see what are the basic nitrogen process in soil plant system , you know  
these are , we have listed these here. So, basic nitrogen soil process you can see these are 
mineralization , let me just make this littl e. Now, the first important process is mineralization, 
which is basically conversion of organic nitrogen to ammonium. The second one is nitrification 
which is conversion of ammonium ions to nitrate and then finally immobilization which is 
inorganic nitroge n conversion to organic nitrogen.  
So, these are major nitrogen related soil process. Now, what are the gains of nitrogen ? The first 
important source of nitrogen here it is biological nitrogen fixation which basically comes from 
plant microbe symbiotic rela tionship and that supply the plant available nitrogen . Secondly, 
another source of nitrogen is fertilizers. So, when you go for fertilization that supplement soil 
plant available nitrogen . The third one is organic additions.  So, when we apply these organic  matter in the soil that enhances the potentially  plant available 
nitrogen in the soil. So, these are the pathways t hrough which nitrogen is augmented in the soil . 
The processes through which nitrogen get lost from the soil  are, first of all is the crop re moval 
which is the reduction in soil nitrogen with crop harvest. Second one is leaching which is 
basically , the leaching of nitrogen basically occurs  for nitrate species , so generally nitrate loss 
with water drainage and potential water quality issues , this is the leaching process.  
Another process is called denitrification process where nitrogen nitrate is lost by microbial 
conversion to nitrogen gases with potential air quality issues. And fourth one is volatilization  and 
where ammonia is loss from soil su rface and creating different types of potential air quality 
issues. A nd finally, erosion , erosion is organic , loss of organic matter with water runoff and 
potential water quality issues. So, these are the pathways through which nitroge n is lost from the 
environment.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:46)  
 
So, this is an overview of the nitrogen cycle. We  will discuss this cycle in details in our 
upcoming slides, but just to have an idea about what actually goes on in the soil, so, let us start 
with the atmosphere nitro gen which is dinitrogen  gas. So, from this atmosphere nitrogen 
different types of nitrogen fixing bacteria, which are there in the soil, they are of two types one is 
freely non symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria and other is symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacte ria. Symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria generally resides in the root nodules of some leguminous 
plants and non symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria are present in the soil. So, these two groups of 
microbes basically fix this atmospheric  nitrogen and this at mospheric nitrogen is taken up by 
these , they are being fixed by these microbes and these nitrogen is been taken up by the plants. 
So, here you can see this nitrogen fixing bacteria living in legume root nodules and also there are 
some nitrogen fixing free ly, the free living soil bacteria.  
So, ultimately these bacteria helps in ammoni fication process which is conversion of , which is 
basically release of ammonium ions , from these ammonium ions nitrification process starts in the 
presence of nitrifying bacter ia ultimately produces nitrites and then in the second step it 
produced the nitrates So, these nitrate is being assimilated by the plant. So, plant can assimilates 
these nitrates  and after the death of these plants and plants , from the plants  different typ es of 
animals can get their food.  
So, after the death of both plants and animals, there are decomposers present in the soil they 
decompose the plant body as well as the animal body. So, basically there these decomposers are 
aerobic and anaerobic bacteria i n fungi  and they ultimately helps in increasing the ammonium 
concentration in the soil through ammoni fication process.  
So, we are going to discuss those steps if in details, but at the same time you should remember 
that these nitrates one part of these nit rate is also converts back to these atmospheric nitrogen by 
the denitrification process and this is mediated by denitrifying bacteria . So, this is how these 
nitrogen moves from air to soil and again back from soil to atmosphere. So, this is how , this is an  
overview of nitrogen cycle , of course, we are going to discuss this nitrogen cycle in details in our 
upcoming slides.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:01)  
 
Now, what is biological nitrogen fixation? Now, biological nitrogen fixation I told you that it is 
basically  fixing of atmospheric nitrogen by the microbes which are present in the soil, they are 
either present freely in the soil or they are present in the root nodules of some leguminous plants. 
So, they are of two types one is symbiotic nitrogen fixation and ot her is n on symbiotic nitrogen 
fixation.  
Now, this symbiotic nitrogen fixation is basically mediated by bacteria with the ability to convert 
this atmospheric nitrogen gas  to plant available nitrogen while growing in association with the 
host plant. So, ther e is always some symbiotic relationship between certain species of Rhizobium 
bacteria and specific Leguminosae plant. So, in this symbiotic relationship this nitrogen fixing 
bacteria basically converts this atmospheric nitrogen into available nitrogen and these available 
nitrogen is being used by the host plant . 
For example, Rhizobium bacteria fix nitrogen in nodules present in the roots of legumes  such as 
soybeans . The other type of biological nitrogen fixation is non symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Now, 
in this process, nitrogen fixation is performed by free living bacteria in the soil and the amount of 
nitrogen fixed by these organisms is much lower than that fixed by symbiotic nitrogen fixation . 
So, obviously, symbiotic nitrogen fixation is having more impo rtance than n on symbiotic 
nitrogen fixation.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:43)  
 
Now, the biological nitrogen fixation we sometimes call it a BNF in short form occurs when 
atmospheric nitrogen is converted to ammonia by an enzyme. So, an enzyme plays a important 
role in this biological nitrogen fixation that is called Nitrogenase enzyme. So, if we see the 
overall reaction of th is biological nitrogen fixation  
So, we can see we are starting with the dinitrogen gas  then we are using this , this  process use 16 
ATPs the n water and then electrons and protons and ultimately creating these ammonia gas and 
then hydrogen gas and also ADP plus P i. So, we can see the conversion of nitrogen into 
ammonia and these conversion of nitrogen into ammonia occurs as a m etal cluster whic h is 
called F E M O C O or FeM oco which is also basically the iron molybdenum cofactor, Fe stands 
for iron , molybdenum  Mo and cofactor stands for co. 
So, FeM oco is basically iron molybdenum cofactor and these mechanism proceeds via a series of 
protonation and reduction steps where in DC for this FeM oco active side hydrogen ates 
dinotrogen gas  substrate. So, basically the idea is it is these dinotrogen gas  is hydrogenated  to 
form these ammonium , this ammonia and so, so, this is basically mediated by these iro n 
molybdenum cofactor with the presence of Nitrogenase enzyme . (Refer Slide Time: 13:35)  
 
So, now, let us see the non biological nitrogen fixation . We have seen the biological nitrogen 
fixing what are the non biological nitrogen fixation. Now, atmospheri c addiction is an example 
of non biological nitrogen fixation.  For example, there are different types of fossil fuel emission , 
from the fossil fuel emission different gases are produced like nitrogen oxides and different 
oxides of nitrogen and sulfur and t hen ultimately they mixed with atmospheric water vapor and 
then comes back to the soil through acid rain in the form of precipitation and also there as 
gaseous losses of nitrogen and N2O  which also create this precipitation . 
And also when there is a lightn ing that also fix nitrogen and ultimately comes to the soil in the 
form of precipitation. So, there are different ways t hrough which these nitrogen is getting fixed 
from atmosphere. So, small amount of nitrogen that is from 5 to 15 pound per acre per year 
generally comes from rain or snowfall or nitrogen  fixed by the electrical discharge of lightning in 
the atmosphere and industrial pollution. So, these are some atmospheric , examples of 
atmospheric addition of nitrogen.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:03)  
 
So, also  you can see that this is more detail. So, here due to different types of emission sources or 
industrial processes, this nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide are emitted. And they form  these 
H2SO4 and HNO3  by reacting with different water vapor and ultimatel y they get deposited in 
the form of wet deposition. So, basically they dissociate  to form sulfate , nitrate and these 
ammonia also.  
So, the sulfate and nitrates comes back to the soil t hrough wet deposition . Also, there are some 
ammonia volatilizations , so there is  the ammonia goes to the atmosphere and reacts with the 
protons and forms this ammonium ion  and that also comes back to the soil through  wet 
deposition process. So, through wet deposition process, you can see there are H plus,  
ammonium , nitrate and  sulfate all these important ions  are coming back into the soil.  
So, these are some atmospheric additions . So,  at the same time, the sulfur dioxide and nitrogen 
oxides are also dry deposited as gases or particle or aerosols. So, these are different sources  of 
atmospheric addition of this nitrogen. So, these nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide released into 
the atmosphere from a variety of sources and ultimately fall to the ground. So, this is an example 
of atmospheric , these are some examples of atmospheric additions.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:32)  
 
Now, if we see the synthetic or industrial process of nitrogen fixation . So, industrial fixation of 
nitrogen is the most important source of nitrogen as a plant nutrient and it is basically based on 
Haber -Bosch synth esis process. So, this in this Haber -Bosch synthesis process basically there is 
we generally in the near industry, hydrogen and nitrogen gas are combined through a reaction to 
form this ammonia . So, here you can see this is a  nitrogen gas and then it react s with these three 
molecules of hydrogen gas and ultimately produces two molecules of ammonia and this process 
is known as the Haber -Bosch process.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:19)  
 So, this is a major process through which industrially the nitrogen is getting f ixed. And also there 
are some synthetic and some ammonia is also produced through this Haber -Bosch process. So, 
we are seeing the ultimate end product is ammonia. So, this ammonia which is produced can be 
used directly as a fertilizer, which is also known as anhydrous ammonia or as a raw material for 
other nitrogen fertilizer products , for example, ammonium phosphate, urea , ammonium nitrate, 
so, these a re all nitrogenous fertilizers.  
So, for the production of these nitrogenous fertilizer we require  these am monia as a raw material. 
So, we can either use these ammonia gas as an anhydrous ammonia as a fertilizer itself or we can 
use this ammonia gas as a raw material for production of these nitrogenous fertilizers . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:12)  
 
Now, let us see th e worldwide trend of synthetic or industrial nitrogen consumption. So, in this 
first plot you can see this is a nitrogen fertilizer consumption trend from 1960 to 2010. And we 
can see also the phosphorus consumption trends also , although the nitrogen consu mption is , 
although this nitrogen consumption rate is quite higher than that of phosphate, but we can also 
see the increased consumption of phosphorus . 
Here, in this plot we can see that changes in nitrogen consumption in different continents. So, we 
can s ee that, in Asia, there has been a steady rise of nitrogen fertilizer consumption in million 
tons for last 50 to 60 years. And this could be due to the intensification of agricultural practices 
in Asia . And in other continents as compared to the other cont inents, however, we can see there is a 
decline a decrease of fertilizer consumption in Europe. And in case of phosphorus also, we can 
see the same trend, where Asia shows the highest phosphorus consumption for last 50 to 60 
years. So, that shows the import ance of these fertilizers on agricultural intensification and how 
these consumptions have been increasing since last 60 years in different agricultural sectors.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:53)  
 
Now, also you can see here this is India data. So, in the Indian da ta you can see how these 
different fertilizers or the sales of different fertilizers, nitrogen and then phosphorus and potash 
fertilizers, how their sales have been in changed in the agenda 2019 -20 as well as 2018 and 19. 
So, this one is 2019 -20 and this i s 2000 , the blue bar is showing the sale in 2018 -19. 
So, you can see for all the fertilizers starting from Urea , DAP and NPK fertilizer except for this 
MOP which is more or less same. So, this Urea , DAP and NPK fertilizers are showing higher 
sales of these  different fertilizers, during 2019 then 2018 . So, that shows the continuous increase 
of fertilizer consumption in India also and that may be due to al so agricultural intensification.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:06)  
 
So, what are the different forms of soil ni trogen ? You can see that there are different inorganic 
forms of soil nitrogen like ammonium , nitrite, nitrate, the n nitrous oxides , then nitric oxides or 
NO gas, then elemental nitrogen or nitrogen  gas. Remember that among these  ammonium and 
nitrate are th e most important forms of plant nitrogen uptake, because plant can only take these 
two forms of nitrogen . 
And remember that these organic forms of soil nitrogen whatever we have talked about these 
usually comprises 2 to 5 percent  of the total cycle nitroge n, so that means, most of the soil 
nitrogen  are present in organic f orms. So, what are the organic forms of soil nitrogen ? Amino 
acids , amino  sugars and other complex nitrogen compounds are the examples of nitrogen 
compounds  or organic forms of soil nitrog en. (Refer Slide Time: 22:02)  
 
Now, let us see what are the major process  through which this organic nitrogen gets converted 
from one form to another f orm? So, the most important process is mineralization process. So, in 
this process basically, the nitro gen in the organic compound gets converted into inorganic 
ammonium and nitrate ions . And the complex organic forms of nitrogen present in plant and 
animal residues are attacked by different types of heterogeneous groups of soil microorganisms 
and then they  are converted into ammonium and nitrate forms.  
Remember that these ammonium and nitrate are the two important forms which plant can uptake . 
So, these are plant available forms. So, to become plant available, this organic form of nitrogen 
which accounts fo r 95 percent  of the total soil nitrogen has to be converted into these inorganic 
forms before plant can uptake them. So, the process comprises series of reaction brought forward 
by soil microbes in the formation of nitrate. So, this is called mineralizatio n process.  
And there remember that this reaction is faster in the presence of substrate . When there is a 
substrate that means, organic sources , organic carbon source that basically gives them the 
energy , so basically this organic matter when we apply organ ic method that acts as a carbon 
source for these different microbes. And as a result, the reaction is getting faster in the presence 
of these different types of microbes which facilitates , which facilitate this mineralization process . (Refer Slide Time: 2 3:44)  
 
Now, as we know that nitrogen mineralization is a conversion of inorganic form of nitrogen to 
ammonium and this is an important process in the nitrogen cycle since it results in the liberation 
of plant available inorganic nitrogen from . What is the  opposite process ? The opposite process is 
known as immobilization. Immobilization is just the opposite of mineralization.  
So, it basically the conversion of inorganic plant available nitrogen that is ammonium and nitrate 
by soil microorganisms to organic nitrogen forms, what are the organic nitrogen form s, amino 
acids and proteins , so these two are the organic nitrogen  forms . And immobilization is basically 
conversion of these ammonium and nitrate into these organic nitrogen forms. So, what do we 
understan d? 
We understand that the immobilization is a reverse process of mineralization and remember that 
these immobilized forms of nitrogen are not readily available for plant uptake because they are a 
amino acids  and proteins and plant cannot uptake amino acids  and proteins because only there 
are two avai lable forms that is  ammonium and nitrate which are in organic f orms. (Refer Slide Time: 25:02)  
 
Now, ple ase recall that mineralization a nd immobilization occurred simultaneously in soil , 
however, the net balanc e between the two varies with environmental conditions and the 
characteristics of the organic material available for decomposition. Now, remember that both 
mineralization and immobilization are accelerated by conditions favorable for microbial growth . 
What are four factors ? First of all moist soil, warm temperature, good aeration, easily 
degradable , organic substrate material, physical mixing of soil via tillage and higher soil pH, all 
these are very much important for mineralization process for creating fa vorable condition for 
mineralization and immobilization proce ss. (Refer Slide Time: 25:52)  
 
Now, we have also discussed in our previous week, the importance of C:N ratio. Now, remember 
that and we have also discussed why C:N ratio governed this immobiliz ation and mineralization. 
So, if you recall, that immobilization mineralization can be disrupted by the incorporation of 
organic residues that have high carbon to nitrogen ratio. So, the ratio of carbon to nitrogen that is 
the C :N ratio defines the relativ e quantities of these elements in residues and living tissues . 
So, where the nitrogen is mineralized or immobilized depends on the C :N ratio of the organic  
matter being decomposed by soil microorganisms.  (Refer Slide Time: 26:40 ) 
 
So, we already know t hat when there is a wide C:N ratio that which is greater than 30 is to 1 then 
immobilization of soil nitrogen  will be favored. And some of these types of materials which are 
having these wide C:N ratios are hay , straw pine needles, then cornstalks,  dry lea ves and sawdust 
these are having high C:N ratios.  
So, they decompose very slowly . And C:N ratios between 20  is to 1 to 30  is to 1, and in the 
range, these immobilization and mineral ization will be almost equal to each other. However, 
when the C :N ratio is less than 20  is to 1 that favore s the rapid mineralization of nitrogen. So, 
residues of narrow C:N ratios are alfalfa, clover , manures , bio solids, and immature grasses . So, 
they decompose very fast.  (Refer Slide Time: 27:40)  
 
Now, if we see the nitrogen  availability as a function of time, we can see that nitrogen 
immobilization mineralization, the changes after we add the material with high C:N ratio in the 
soil. So, here you can see, when we are adding the material with high C:N ratio in the soil th e 
nitrogen availability goes down with time because the available soil nitrogen is immobilized and 
the same time carb on dioxide evolution increases.  
So, when the C:N ratio when we add a material with C:N ratio it will favor the immobilization, 
so, nitrogen ava ilability will go down . And after a certain time again these available nitrogen 
content will increase through nitrogen mineralization, because when these immobilization will 
take place, and those plants will die after some time they will decompose and furt her release 
these nitrogen,  so that available nitrogen will also increase after a certain period of time through 
nitrogen mineralization process. So, this is how these nitrogen availability changes when we add 
different residues with varying  C:N ratio . (Refer Slide Time: 29:18)  
 
Now, we have seen the same slide previously also , so a ratio of 20 to 30 results in an equilibrium 
state between mineralization and immobilization, and soil microorganisms have a C :N ratio of 
around 8. So, we can see a cutoff valu e say an approximate cutoff value of C :N ratio you can see 
here that is 25 is to 1 which is in between 20 to 30 and that is basically match your alfalfa , hay 
and also finished compost have 15 is to 1,  microbial biomass has 10 is to 1, so that  these helps 
fast decomposition.  
However, sawdust , wheat straw, corn strover these are having higher C:N ratio, so they favor the 
nitrogen immobilization. So, this is how the C :N ratio governs this nitrogen mineralization and 
immobilization . (Refer Slide Time: 30:10)  
 
So, guys I have completed this Lecture 6 and these are some of the references you can explore 
for more information regarding these nitrogen cycle. We  will continue this nitrogen cycle in our 
upcoming lectures also, but for now, let us wrap up this lecture  and let us meet in our next 
lecture. Thank you.  