Soil Fertility  and Fertilizers  
Professor  Somsubhra  Chakraborty  
Department  of Agriculture and Food  Engineering  
Indian Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture 60 
Agricultural  Productivity  and Environmental  Quality  (Contd.)  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:13) 
 
Welcome  friends  to this last lecture of this NPTEL  Online  Certification  Course  of Soil 
Fertility  and Fertilizers . Today,  we are going  to focus  on sustainable  development  goals  and 
different  types  of ecosystem  services.  Now,  in our previous  four lectures  of this week,  we 
have  discussed  some  important  concepts . The topic  of this week  obviously,  the agricultural  
productivity and environmental  quality.  
So, in the first lecture of this week,  we have  discussed  about  the carbon  sequestration  and 
how agriculture  impact s carbon  sequestration,  how soil plays  an important  role for carbon  
sequestration.  And in the second  lecture,  we have discussed  about  the fertilizer  related  
pollution problems  and how to mitigate  those  pollution  problems  using alternative  sources  
like bio-fertilizer  like manu re we have  discussed . 
In the third  lecture,  we have  discussed  about  the stubble  burning which  is one of the major  
cause of environmental  problems  in India , particularly  in Indian condition.  And in the fourth  
lecture,  we have discussed  about the advantages  of conservation  agriculture  over 
conventional  agriculture  and how the conservation agricultural  practices  can impact  the 
different  types  of soil physical  and hydraulic  properties,  we have  discussed  in details.  Now,  in this lecture,  we are going to see what  are different  types  of sustainable  development  
goals  and specifically  we are going  to discuss several  ecosystem  services  and how they 
impact  our surrounding.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  02:10)  
 
So, let us see what  are the concepts  which  we are going to discuss.  First of all, we are going  
to discuss the sustainable  development  goals  or SDGs , then we are going to discuss about  
how to estimate  the environmental  cost. And also, we are going  to discuss the criteria  for 
promoting ecosystem  services.  And then we are going to see the impacts  of agricultur al 
systems on ecosystem  services.  And finally,  we are going  to see net global  warming  impact.  
So, these  are the concepts  which  we are going to cover  in this lecture.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  02:46)  
 
And these are some  of the keywords  like ecosystem , SDG,  sustainability,  environmental  cost 
and green  budgeting,  which  we are going  to discuss in this lecture.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  02:54)  
 
Now,  we all know  about  ecosystem.  However,  I would like to recap  or recall  the definition  of 
ecosystem,  which  is a specific area of size in which  climate , landscape,  animals  and plants  
are constantly interacting.  And remember  that an ecosystem  is a community  of animals  and 
plants  interacting  with one another  and with their physica l environment.  Now,  what  includes  
an ecosystem ? So, ecosystem  includes  physical  and chemical  components  such as soil, water,  nutrients,  that 
support  the organism  living  within  them . So, we can see that soil is an important  component  
of the ecosystem  and soil is constantly interacting  with their surrounding  living  organisms  to 
maintain  this ecological  balance.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  03:50)  
 
Now,  we already  have developed briefly  about  the sustainable  development  goal,  but let us 
discuss more  about  these sustain able development  goals  or SDGs.  Now,  we know  that these  
sustainable  development  goals  or SDGs  also known as the global  goals  were adopted  by 
United  Nation  in 2015 as an universal  call to action  to end the poverty and protect  the planet  
and ensure  that by 2030  all people  enjoy peace and prosperity.  
Now,  to enjoy  the peace and prosperity  it is very important  to achieve  these  all 17 goals . First 
of all, no poverty , then zero Hunger , then good health  and wellbeing , then quality  education,  
then gender  equality , then clean  water  and sanitation , then affordable  and clean  energy , then a 
decent  work  and economic  growth,  and then industry motivation  and infrastructure,  reduced  
inequalities,  then sustainable  cities  and communities,  then responsible  consumption and 
production,  climate  action,  life below  water , life on land,  peace,  justice  and strong institutions  
and partnerships  for the goals.  
Now,  these  are the 17 sustainable  development  goals  adopted by United  Nations  to ensure  
that people  enjoy  peace and prosperity  worldwide.  Now,  you can see that the 13th goal that is 
climate  action  is a very important  goal.  And this goal is adapted  to reduce the impact  of climate  change . Climate  change  is one of the major  issues of contemporary  world  and several  
research  as well as several  policies  were implemented  for reducing the climate  change.  
So, that is why the climate  action  is an important  goal.  And while  we talk about  climate  
action,  of course,  soil plays  an important  part as you know,  because soil act as a storehouse  of 
the carbon  and thereby  it can reduce the negative  impact  of the greenhouse  gases by carbon  
sequestration.  So, that is why we should focus , we should always  try to adopt the best 
management  practices  for soil. Now,  the next question comes  to our mind,  what  are the major  
obstacles  for achieving  these  goals . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  06:27)  
 
The major  obstacles  for achieving  goals  are hunger.  Now,  so, what  should  be our goal,  so, to 
end the hunger  achieve food security  and improve  nutrition and promote  sustainable  
agriculture . Why? Because we know  that extreme  hunger  and malnutrition  remain  barriers  to 
sustainable  development  and create a trap from  which  people  cannot  easily  escape.  
Because you cannot  expect  100 hungry- farmer  to follow  the environmental  friendly  steps,  if 
he has a more  economic  action  irrespective of whether  that can create or that can bring  
negative  impacts  to the environment.  So, first of all, we have to reduce this hunger  and 
malnutrition  so, that these  sustainable  agricultural  practices  can be perform ed by the farming  
community.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  07:23)  
 
Now,  if we see the agricultural  ecosystem . Of course,  agriculture  ecosystem  plays  a very 
important  role for producing  several  types  of services  we call it ecosystem  services.  Now,  we 
can broadly  categorize these  services  into four categories.  One is supporting  services . 
Another  is provisioning services . Third one is regulating services  and fourth one is non-
market ed services.  
Now,  if you see the supporting  services , under  the supporting services  we can see soil 
structure  and fertility,  then nutrient  recycling , then water  provision,  genetic biodiversity 
comes  under  these  supporting services.  Under the provisioning services,  food,  fiber  and fuel 
production.  And then regulating services  include  soil retention,  pollination,  dung burial , 
water  purification . 
Nonmarket ed services  include  water  supply,  soil conservation,  aesthetic landscape,  wild 
habitat . However,  there  are several  ecosystems  disservices  also like habitat  loss, nutrient  loss, 
pesticide  poisoni ng of non-targeted  species,  which  ultimate s lead to the pest damage  
competition  for pollination  and competition  for water  from  other  ecosystems.  So, these  are 
some  of the disadvantages,  which  we can see from  different  types  of ecosystem  services.  (Refer  Slide Time:  08:50)  
 
Now,  the next question comes  to our mind  how we can estimate  the environmental  cost. 
Now,  if we see broadly two categor y, one is positive  impacts  by different  ecosystems  services  
another  is negative  impacts.  So, we can see but provisioning,  the positive  impacts  are food 
and raw materials  and the supporting  services  we know  soil carbon  enrichment , soil nutrient  
enrichment,  then nutrient  mineralization , soil formation,  nitrogen fixation  and phosphorus  
solubilization.  
These  come under  the supporting  services . In case of regulating  services  we know  carbon  
sequestration , water  holding services,  biological  control,  then groundwater  recharge,  all these  
are having positive  impact.  But at the same  time,  there  are several  negative  impacts  also. Like 
we can see we call them  ecosystem  disservices  like nutrient  loss and pollution,  greenhouse  
gas emission , pesticide  pollution,  groundwater  depletion,  soil erosion,  and ultimately  impacts  
on human health.  
So, these  are the negative  impacts . So, we need  to maintain  a balance,  we need  to maintain  
always  a positive  balance which  basically  is calculated  by subtracting the negative  impacts  
from  the positive  impact.  So, the environmental  cost for ecosystem  services  is always  
calculated  by subtracting the negative  impacts  from  the positive  impacts.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  10:21)  
 
Now,  then next question comes  to our mind . Can we assume  that economic  growth  that is 
destroying its ecosystem  supports  will be sustainable? Now,  environmental  sustainability  is 
dependent  on several  factors.  First of all, we need to shift to renewable resources.  And we 
need  to limit  consumption of nonrenewable  resources.  We need  to protect  the health  of the 
ecosystem  and we need  to avoid ecosystem  becoming irreparably  damaged,  we need  to avoid 
excess  pollution.  
And because pollution can cause damage to health  and earth  atmosphere . We need to 
maintain  the target  welfare not GDP  because value  measures  of economic  and social  welfare 
more  than GDP . And also, we need to maintain  the intergenerationa l decision  and make 
economic  decision  based  on long term consequences.  So, all these  are needed  to get the 
environmental  sustainability  goals.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  11:27)  
 
Now,  what  to do? First of all, we need  to measure the ecosystem  services  and associa ted 
environmental  cost. And then secondly,  we need to manage  the ecosystem  to reduce  the 
environmental  cost and enhance its services.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:46)  
 
Now,  let us see the definition  of ecosystem  services.  Now,  ecosystem  services  can be defined  
as the many  and varied  benefits  to humans  provided by the natural  environment  and from  
healthy  ecosystems.  And such ecosystem  includes  for example,  agro-ecosystems,  forest  
ecosystem,  grassland  ecosystem  and aquatic ecosystems.  These  ecosystems  functioning in 
healthy  relationship  offers  such things  as natural  pollination  of crops,  clean  air, extreme 
weather  mitigation,  and human  mental  and physical  wellbeing.  Collectively,  these  benefits  are becoming  known  as ecosystem  services  and are often  integral  
to the provision of food,  provision  of clean  drinking water,  the decomposition  of wastes  and 
resilience and productivity of foods  ecosystem.  So, these  are mainly  different  types  of 
ecosystem  services.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:50)  
 
Now,  if we see pictorially  the ecosystem  services  you can see that nature  can give us a 
different  type of components  free like clean  water,  fish, food,  pollination,  cool temperature , 
control  flooding,  and then pollination . And we have  to regulate these  by controlling the 
flooding,  then purifying the water,  then storing the carbon  and cleaning  the air. And also, in 
case of cultural  management,  we should provide  education , we should provide  maintain  the 
recreation,  we should  maintain  the aesthetic beauty,  and then stewardship.  
And finally,  supporting the support  services  we need  to give buy food and then soil 
formation,  photosynthesis,  biodiversity,  and habitat.  So, these  supporting  services  are given 
by these  ecosystems  like they give us food,  they give us soil formation,  they give us 
photosynthesis,  biodiversity,  habitat  and stewardship.  However,  from  our point  of view,  we 
should maintain  the stewardship  aesthetic recreation  education . 
And also, we should regulate this air quality , carbon storing,  water  purification,  control  
flooding.  So, these are different  types  of ecosystem  services  in four different  categories  like 
provisioning,  regulating,  culture  and supporting.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  14:20)  
 
Now,  the next important  concept  is green  budgeting of agriculture.  Now,  here there are two 
terms,  one is economic  budget,  which  is basically  synonymous  to net income , another  is 
green  budget,  which  is also known as green  income.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:36)  
 
Now how to estimate  the environmental  cost of agriculture.  So, agriculture,  we know  affects  
the environment  and if it, it is often  hidden,  but can be quantified and priced.  So, the 
environmental  cost can be expressed  in terms  of rupees  per hectare  and price due to the 
positive  impacts  minus  costs due to the negative  impacts.  So, if you subtract  the cost due to 
the negative  impact  from  the price  due to the positive  impacts,  we will get the environmental  
cost. However,  the green  income,  which  is also rupees  per hectare is basically  the summation  of 
net income  plus environmental  cost, it could be positive  or negative  also, because plus minus  
environmental  cost. So, we know  now that what  is environmental  cost and what  is green  
income.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:27)  
 
Now,  let us see the comparison  of net and green  income  of conventionally  tilled  and zero 
tilled  wheat in Karnal , Haryana.  So, here you can see this is conventional  tillage , this is from  
zero tillage,  and this is for zero tillage  plus residue.  So, you can see all the net income  and 
then ecosystem  services  and green  income  are showing the similar  patter n where  the 
conventional  tillage  showed the lowest  net income,  lowest  ecosystem  services  and lowest  
green  income.  
However,  we can see that the zero tillage  and zero tillage  with residue  shows  almost similar  
net income  ecosystem  services  and green  income  and they are always  higher  than that of the 
conventional  tillage.  So, that implies  the benefits  of using the different  types  of conservation 
agricultural  practices  as compared  to the conventional  agricultural  practices.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  16:30)  
 
Also,  we can see impacts  of agriculture  system  on ecosystem  services . Here, you can see how 
these  different  things  are varying.  So, you can see the conservation,  when  you follow  the 
conservation agriculture,  soil quality , then soil erosion  control , soil organic  carbon pool, and 
also the environmental  pollution control  and water  availability  for crops  are higher  than 
conventional  and integrated  or moderate  intensity  agriculture.  
So, that shows  the, and also if you see the integrated  or moderate integrated  farming  system,  
you can see in case of integrated  farming  system,  they can choose  the higher  crop yield  
productivity and higher  weed  control  and then insect  and pathogen control , and also, they 
also offered  the soil erosion control  also. However,  conservation agricul ture is most  suitable  
for soil quality maintenance and soil erosion control.  
However,  conservation agriculture  is not as good as other  practices  for weed  control.  So, 
integrated  farming  systems are expected  to provide  the satisfactory  condition for crop 
production while  adequately  sustaining environmental  quality  and health.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  17:52)  
 
Now,  also if we see the integrated  management  practices,  how they can increase the crop 
diversity  and deliver  more  ecosystem  services.  Here,  you can see schematic  depiction of crop 
diversity  on US farm  during  the 20th century.  And we can see here in the x axis, this is the 
temporal  variation  early  20th century  to 21st century . And then you can see the crop diversity  
in the x axis and then ecosystem  services.  
So, when  there is a high diversity  there is high ecosystem  services . However,  you can see that 
as time progresses  there were several  retrogressive  factors  like mechanizations,  then public  
policy,  labor  requirements , single  enterprise system.  So, those  impa cted the reducing the crop 
diversity  and once  they reduce the crop diversity  ecosystem  services  also will reduced . And 
then you can see single  enterprise system . 
However,  the adoption of different  types  of complementary  practices  like integrated  crop and 
livestock,  dynamic  crop rotation , cover  crops , perennial  bioenergy crops  have  improved the 
ecosystem  services  in the 21st century  systems.  So, we can see here it is schematically  
depicting crop diversity  on US farm . The factors  which  are associated  with the changes  and 
proposed integrated  management  practices  to increase the crop diversity  and deliver  more  
ecosystem  services.  
So, you can see that different  types  of complementary  practices  like integrated  crop and 
livestock  and these  dynamic  crop rotation , cover crops  specifically  these  conservation  
agricultural  practices  can help in attaining  higher  ecosystem  services  than what  was 
previously achieved.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  19:45)  
 
Also,  if you compare the economic  value  of ecosystem  services  in organic  and conventional  
fields,  you can see all in four ecosystem  services  like provisioning  services,  regulating  
services,  cultural  services  and supporting services,  organic  fields  are giving us better  
economic  value  in US dollar  per hectare per year as compared  to the conventional  field,  we 
can see here,  we can see regulating  services  also producing higher  economic  value  in case of 
organic  field. Cultural  services  produce s almost similar . However,  supporting  services  also 
produce  higher  economic  value  in organic  fields  than the conventional  fields.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:27)  
 
Also,  you can compare  the degree of ecosystem  services  from  different  types  of ecosystem,  
like here we can see this is the start diagram  showing the degree of ecosystem  services  associated  with maize grain  ethanol  system.  So, we can see crop production  may be higher.  
However,  the other  ecosystem  services  are somewhat  not that much.  However,  in case of this 
one, which  shows  the star diagram  showing the degree  of ecosystem  services  associated  with 
switchgrass  bioenergy system . 
We can see crop production not only crop production,  but also water  quality , soil quality  and 
greenhouse  gas regulation,  these ecosystem  services  are greater  than biological  control,  
nutrient  regulation , biodiversity and wildlife  habitat.  However,  if we consider  the third  one 
which  shows  the ecosystem  services  associated  with low input  and high diversity  bio-energy  
system . 
You can see most  of the ecosystem  services  are producing at the optimum  quantity,  nutrient  
regulation,  biological  control , soil quality,  water  quality , greenhouse  gas regulation,  wildlife  
habitat  and biodiversity.  So, you can see that when  we are following these  low input  high 
diversity  bioenergy system  that can help us to get better  ecosystem  services.  
(Refer  Slide Time:  21:52)  
 
Also,  we can see here the net energy  balance for current  biofuels  and different  types  of prairie  
bioenergy on degraded  soil. So, in the current  biofuels,  you can see here there are outputs  and 
these  are the inputs . In the outputs,  we can see these  black  color  bar showing  the biofuel , 
however,  this patch  is the crop products . And these  are basically  the fossil  energy  inputs  for 
maintaining  the farm  and then conversion.  So, you can see here,  so, this is output  and this is input.  So, net energy balance will be output  
minus  input.  Similarly,  for different  types  so this for corn gain ethanol , which  we can see 
here,  this is for soybean biodiesel . So, these  are for the current  biofuels . However,  these  are 
for bioenergy  on degraded  soil. So, we can see the output  minus  input  and then output  minus  
input , output  minus  input,  so net energy  balance.  
And also, you can see net energy  balance  ratio,  which  is basically  output  by input.  So, you 
can see here the net energy  balance in case of these  bioenergy on degraded  soil, so you can 
see here 5.51 and output  by input  is 5.44.  And then here you can see 8.09.  So, here we are 
getting  higher  NEB  ratio than these  current  biofuels . 
So, here we can see that these  are the NEB or net energy balance for two food- based biofuels,  
these  are the current  biofuels  going  on fertile  soils,  and these  are biofuels  which  are grown in 
agriculturally  degraded  soils.  So, this gives  us a comparison between  the different  types  of 
practices  and how we can gather  more  net energy  balance  from  different  crop system  or 
cropping system.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:00)  
 
Now,  if you see the selected  ecosystem  services  that are implemented  by farms  in different  
farming  system  and their scale,  you can see that for maintaining  and supply proper  water  
management  integrated  farming  system  gives  us the low level  of services  ecosystem  services.  
However,  organic  farming  system  gives  us the high level . However,  conventional  system  
does not give us proper  water  management.  So, you can see for different  pract ices like climate  protection,  we can see higher  level  of 
ecosystem  services  from  integrated  and organic  system . However,  conventional  system  does 
not give that benefit . Limited  soil erosion,  we can see for organic  farming  system  we are 
getting  higher  soil conservation and limited  soil erosion.  However,  in case of conventional  
tillage,  there is your lack of that ecosystem  service.  So, you can compare for different  types  
of ecosystem  services  and which  farming  system s are beneficial  for which  ecosystem  servic e 
we can see from  this chart.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:18)  
 
Now,  if we see the net global  warming  impact . The net global  warming  impact  we can see in 
case of, so global  warming  impact  we can see conventional  agricultural  practices  gives  us the 
positive  or higher global  warming  impact . However,  in case of no till, reduce input  and 
biologically  based  system,  alfalfa- based  system , then different  types  of forest  systems,  they 
can help us to reduce the global  warming  impact . 
The successional  communities  means  those communities  which  are grown  in shade,  but later 
they become dominant  species.  So, these  are known as a successional  communities . 
However,  mature  forests  can show  some  positive  global  warming  impact , and that means,  
they are actually  producing the global  warming.  So, we can see conventional  agriculture  then 
popular  based perennial  crops  and mature  forest  produce  some  global  warming  impact.  
However,  the no till, reduced  impact , biologically  based , alfalfa,  early  successional  and mid 
successional  communities  can produce  the beneficial  effects  on global  warming  impact . So, 
that means  they can reduce the global  warming  impact . (Refer  Slide  Time:  26:38)  
 
Now,  also if we can see the seasonal  variation  in soil moisture . So, these  are seasonal  
variation  of soil moisture  in two different  conventional  and no till system.  So, this is the no 
till system  and this is the conventional  system . You can see that any at any given  point  of 
time in the no till system  they have  more  moisture  content  than the conventional  system.  So, 
this is the 6 weeks  drought  begin after. 
So, here this R stands  for the rainfall,  which  occurred  at 3rd June.  So, this is regarding  this 
research . And then the 6-week  drought  began  after 3 June rainfall.  So, after that there was a 
6-week  rain drought . And we can see a different  time we are having higher  moisture  content  
in no till system  than conventional  system.  So, that shows  the beneficial  effects  or beneficial  
ecosystem  services  provided by the conservation agriculture  as compared  to the conventional  
agricultural  practices.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  27:50)  
 
Also,  if you see some  regional  examples  of effect  of agroforestry  systems on soil health,  you 
can see in western  Himalayas  the major  challenge  is minimizing  soil and water  reduction in 
agroecosystem  on steep  slopes . And what  type of management  practices  has helped  for 
reducing the challenges  or overcoming  those  challenges  like contour  tree crops , reduced 
runoff  and soil loss by because contour  tree crops  can help to reduce this runoff  and soil loss 
by 40 and 48 percent  respectively.  
Then similarly,  in Himalayas  rehabilitation  of degraded  abandoned and agricultural  mines  
spoiled sites are the major  challenges  which  has been  addressed  by enhanced  biomass  
accumulation  and soil physiochemical  properties  and carbon  sequestration.  Similarly,  in case 
of central  India  soil improvement  was the major  challenge.  So however,  different  types  of 
practices  has been  achieved.  
So, all these  changes  have  been brought  by the agroforestry  system.  So, agroforestry  has 
played  a tremendous  impact  on improving the soil health . Because we can see in western  
Himalayas  these  agroforestry  has helped  to reduce the soil erosion and also in case of 
Himalayas  they can help in improving the soil physiochemical  properties  and carbon  
seque stration , in case of central  India  they helped  him soil organic  carbon  improvement  and 
then mineral  nitrogen and phosphorus  increment.  
And also, you can see in case of Kurukshetra  Himalayas,  this agroforestry  has helped  in 
increasing  the soil microbial  and tree biomass  and increasing  the available nitrogen.  So, you 
can see that agroforestry  has helped  tremendously for generating  the positive  ecosystem  services  for the betterment  of the environment.  And also, thereby  they have  solved those  
challenges  which  were considered  as daunting for better  management  of better  ecosystem  
management  in these  regions.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  30:15)  
 
And also, however,  there  are several  limitations  of accessing  the ecosystem  services.  First of 
all, the ecosystem  services  are difficult  to quantify due to their intangible  benefits  and 
multiple  value  options.  So, also there are synergies  and tradeoffs  between  different  ecosystem  
services.  There are mismatching  of scales  and different  stakeholders  and limited  technologies  
are there to improve  the ecosystem  services.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  30:42)  
 So, summar ily we know  that agriculture's  primary  focus  so far has been on production with 
little concern  for environment  and ecosystem  services  and the natural  environment  has been  
degraded  and its service to society  was compromised so far. Now,  it is time for an alternative  
approach  and ecosystem  restoration  is the key for sustainability.  And it is not easy to put a 
cash value  on the nature  more  difficult  is how to improve  health  of an ecosystem  so that it 
can provide  better  services.  So, ultimately,  we need better  policy for eco-regional  planning  
and incentives  and marketing.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  31:24)  
 
Okay  guys,  so we have  come to the end of this lecture.  So, I would like to end this lecture by 
discussing  this line. So, that is you should always  remember  that nature  is beautiful,  and we 
should always  protect  it and we should always  restore  the ecosystem.  So, guys,  that makes  
the end of this course  of Soil Fertility  and Fertilizer . (Refer  Slide  Time:  32:00)  
 
  
These are some  of the references,  which  I have  used for this lecture,  you can go ahead  and 
see these  references . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  32:09)  
 
With this, guys  let us wrap  up this course,  I hope  that you have  gathered  some  good 
knowledge s about  soil fertility,  and then soil nutrient  and their interactions  and how they are 
useful  for plant  nutrition,  what  are the beneficial  practices  or management  practices  you 
should follow  for ensuring better  soil health  so that our future  generation  can reap all the 
benefits  and how we can maintain  the soil for better  climate  and reduce the climate  change  
impact.  So, we have  discussed  all these  things.  If you have any difficulties,  please feel free to email  
me and I will be happy  to answer  your queries.  I wish you all the best for the final exam.  
And,  again,  if you are having any difficulties,  please let me know  and I will be happy to 
answer  your queries.  I would also like to thank my TAs,  my students  who have  helped  me for 
developing this course  and delive ring this course.  Thank you, guys . I wish  you all the best. 