Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultu re and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 07  
Soil Nitrogen for Plant Nutrition (Contd.)  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:20)  
 
Welcome friends to the se cond lecture of week two of NPTEL  online certification costs of Soil 
Fertility and Fertilizers . And in this week, we are talking about Soil Nitrogen  for Plant Nutrition . 
So, in the first lecture of this week, we have already discussed about different forms  of nitrogen 
and also we have discussed the mineralization process, immobilization process, and we have 
discussed the biological nitrogen fixation and the types of biological nitrogen fixation we have 
discussed . 
And also we have seen the overview of nitrog en soil nitrogen cycle and also we have discussed 
the importance of C :N ratio in controlling the immobilization and mineralization in the soil. So, 
in this second lecture of week two or Lecture Number 7, we are going to cover thes e following 
concepts.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:03)  
 
So, we are going to discuss in details about the mineralization processes of organic nitrogen and 
then we are going to discuss the nitrification mechanism in soil and then we are going to discuss 
the environmental factors affecting  mineralization and nitrification then soil nitrogen cycle , 
forms of nitrogen loss, management of fertilizer nitrogen and high nitrogen fertilizer use 
efficiency. So, all these different types of issues we are going to discuss in this lecture . 
(Refer Slide  Time: 01:34)  
 And these are some of the keywords which we are going to discuss nitrogen mineralization , 
amminization, ammon ification and nitrification. So, these are some important process , we a re 
going to discuss in details.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:46)  
 
So, if we see the important nitrogen processes, soil related processes as well as the types of 
microorganisms involved and their characteristics . We can have a detailed overview of these 
from this table. So, you can see here the first process is amminizati on process, what is 
amminization  process, I will deal in detail. So, in this amminization  process, the microbes are 
mainly heterotrophic microorganisms are involved . 
And in this m  amminization  process, it requires organic carbon compounds for their source of 
energy. So, these  microbes require organic carbon compounds for their source of energy . Second 
process is ammonification  process, here also heterotrophic microorganisms are involved . And in 
the nitrification process, this is being governed by autotrophi c microorganisms and these 
autotrophic microorganisms obtain their energy from oxidation of inorganic salts and their 
carbon from carbon dioxide of the surrounding atmosphere. So, these are some the process  and 
these are the microbes or microorganisms whic h are involved in these processes.  (Refer Slide Time: 03:20)  
 
Now, let us start with the amminization  process . The amminization  process  is basically  
conversion of protein to  these compounds with amine groups. So, the population of heterotrophic 
soil micr oorganisms is basically composed of numerous groups of bacteria and fungi. And each 
of these organisms is responsible for one or more steps of the numerous reactions in the organic 
matter decomposition process . 
And end product of activities of one group ac ts as a substrate or the next as so on down the line 
until the material is decomposed. So, basically what happens different groups of bacteria and 
fungi are involved in this decomposition process. So, one groups decompose and one group 
mean, governs one pr ocess and the end product  from that reaction acts as a substrate for the next 
group and then they start from there and then convert this substrate to other compounds . And 
ultimately, we reach to t he final decomposition process.  (Refer Slide Time: 04:36)  
 
So, this amminization,  so one of the final stages in this decomposition of nitrogenous material is 
the hydrol ytic decomposition of proteins. So, we can see this amminization  process release 
amino  acids and amines. So, this process is termed amminization  and it is a function of some of 
the heterotrophic organisms . So, it can be represented by this equation , so protein R-NH2 plus 
CO2 plus energy and other products. So, ultimately from this protein, you can see there is a 
decomposition of protein ultimately t o produce these amines, carbon dioxide energy and other 
products. So, you can consider this a first  step of decomposition process.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:25)  
 Now, the second step is the ammonification  process. So, these amines are amino acids, so, 
release d that farther utilized by other groups of heterotrophs with the release of ammonia cal 
compounds. So, this step is termed ammonification . So, you can see here R-NH2 and here it is 
reacting with the water , ultimately it is producing these ammonia and then a lcohol and energy.  
So, both oxidative and reductive deamination  process contribute to ammonification  in flooded 
soils. So, basically in short the conversion of amino acids to ammonia cal compounds is basically 
known as the ammonification  process and this ammonification  process is mediated by 
heterotrophs . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:24)  
 
Now, we know that ammonification  is the second step of mineralization in which the amino 
groups are converted into ammonium. So, we can see here first we start with organic nitro gen 
and its get converted into ammonium through the ammonification  process. So, this is the second 
step, the first step is amminization  and then ammonification.  And this ammonium ion is basically 
utilized by other mic roorganisms to get mineralized.  
So, ult imately this ammonium ion gets converted into nitrate, which we are going to discuss . 
And also some amount of this ammonium ion  gets also assimilated by microbial community 
through the process  of immobilization. So, this ammonium which is formed due to 
mineralization or ammonification  can also goes for further mineralization and goes to nitrate or it can be assimilated by different microorganisms or crops. So, I hope now, this ammonification  
process is clear.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:34)  
 
Now, biological oxid ation of ammonium to nitrate in the soil is known as nitrification . This is 
one of the major step of nitrogen dynamics in soil. So, this two step process of nitrification is 
basically accomplished by conversion of ammonium ion to nitrate first and then fro m nitrate to 
nitrite first and from nitrite to nitrate by two groups of au totrophic bacteria in the soil.  
So, here you can see the first step is conversion of ammonium ion to nitr ite and the second step 
this nitrite gets converted to nitrate. So, the first  conversion of ammonium to nitrate is basically 
mediated by Nitrosomonas which is obligate autotrophic microorganism, the second step that is 
conversion of nitrite to nitrate is governed by another obligate autotrophic bacteria called 
Nitrobacter . 
So, thes e two organisms play an important role for conversion of ammonium ion to ultimately to 
nitrate and this process of conversion of ammonium to nitrate is known as nitrification process. 
So, nitrification is very important process through which these ammonium  gets converted into 
nitrate because most of the crops prefer these nitrate as an available nitrogen form. So, it is 
important that this ammonium which is formed due to ammonification  process must be 
converted into this nitrate  through this nitrification p rocess. So, this biological nitroge n, it is a biological oxidation process and these two , and one more 
important thing is this nitrate which is an intermediate step or intermediate product in this 
nitrification whole nitrification process. This is very sho rt lived and it is toxic in nature  for plant 
also, but fortunately, it is very short lived and gets converted to nitrate very fast. So, that is why 
there is no accumulation of nitrate in the soil , its get converted into nitrate very fast through the 
Nitrobacter organisms or bacteria.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:23)  
 
Now, it is clear to us that nitrification is a micro mediated process and Nitrosomonas basically 
helps in conversion of ammonium to nitrite and nitrobacter helps in conversion of nitrite to 
nitrate. Now, we  will also see in our coming slides that the rapid nitrogen conversion to nitrate is 
sometime not desirable, because plant can uptake very few  amount,  I mean very small amount of 
available nitrate and rest of it gets lost from the soil through diffe rent process.  
So, to arrest  or to stop this rapid conversion of ammonium to nitr ite, so  that nitrate production 
gets us , nitrate production is reduced. So, we generally apply different types of nitrification 
inhibitors . What are these nitrification inhibit ors? One of them is nitrapyrin , which is also known 
as N-serve,  another one is dicyandiamide or DCD and these basically interfere with the function 
of these Nitrosomonas bacteria . 
So, the conversion of ammonium to the nitrate gets hampered and as a result nitrate production 
will not be there. So, this is called nitrification inhibitors. So, here you can see the complete conversion , complete process of nitrification. So, yo u can see here it is  the organic nitrogen 
(())(12:12)  and then ultimately ammonium to Nitrosomonas to nitrite mediated by Nitrobacter  to 
nitrate. So, these ammonium plus three molecules of oxygen ultimately converts into nitr ite and 
then fo ur protons and ultimate ly it gets oxidized to nitrate. So, this is the nitrification process. 
And you can see that this nitrite is an intermediate and very short lived, which gets im mediately 
converted to nitrate.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:46)  
 
Now, nitrification we know that it is a transformation of ammonium to nitrate and then nitrite to 
nitrate it can be , this pathway of nitrification you can clearly see here . So, first there is an 
ammonium ion which is and then this is basically utilized by ammonia oxidizing microbes or 
Nitrosomonas to get converted into nitrite and then this nitrate gets converted into n itrate 
oxidizing microbes or Nitrobacter to nitrate. And from both these they can convert into nitric  
oxide gas and nitrous oxide gas and ultimately goes through the atmosphere also. So, this is  
showin g the pathway of nitrification.  (Refer Slide Time: 13: 39) 
 
And also, we can see here that there are different types of enzymes which governs this 
conversion of , the different conversions in this nitrification process, we can see these ammonium 
to ammonium hydroxide conversion is basically governed by these a mmonia mono oxygenase 
enzyme and then from these ammonium hydroxide to nitrite is being governed by these 
hydroxylamine oxidoreductase enzyme and this conversion of nitrite to nitrate is mediated by 
these nitrite oxido reductase enzyme. So, not only it is t his process is governed by 
microorganisms, but at the same time, these are also dependent on these different enzymes also.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:43)  
 So, these are some of the factors which are affecting the nitrification in soil. First of all is supply 
of ammonium and then population of nitrifying organism, then soil reaction , soil aeration and 
then soil moisture , temperature these are all important for controlling these nit rification process 
in the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:08)  
 
Now, in neutral to alk aline pH condition chances of formation of nitrate is more than in acid soil. 
So, in alkaline condition formation of nitrate the chance is more than in acid soil . And when we 
go for high rate of application of urea fertilizer that can result in the accumul ation of nitrate even 
under acidic pH condition, because pH increases due to hydrolysis of urea , so when you apply 
this urea into acidic p H soil that can increase the pH by the hydrolysis of urea and ultimately that 
results in the accumulation of nitrate.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:52 ) 
 
Now, mineralization and nitrification are also influenced by several factors like moisture , 
aeration , pH. So, for example, nitrification occurs very slowly at cold temperatures and ceases 
once the temperature declines below fre ezing, because the microorganisms the bacteria which 
are involved in this nitrification process, they are activities increase wi th the increase of 
temperature.  
So, if the temperature goes below freezing, they become inactive and ultimately there is no 
conv ersion of one nitrogen  form to another nitrogen  form . The rate increases with increasing 
temperature until the bacterial viability is reduced, which is around 95 degree Fahrenheit to 1 00 
degree Fahrenheit and then nitrification begins to decline as the tem perature increases. So, there 
is also a certain threshold beyond which the nitrification also will go down . 
Moisture and oxygen are also necessary for microbial function in both the mineralization as well 
as nitrification process. Remember that since these  processes are mediated by microbes, we have 
to ensure that their growth condition proper growth conditions are maintained. Excessive  
moisture sometime limits oxygen availability, reducing this mineralization and nitrification rates 
because nitrification i s an o xidation process.  
So, when there is excessive moisture in the soil that will occupy the space of air ultimately 
reducing the oxygen availability and ultimately reducing this nitrification process. So, in this 
condition, this is called the anaerobic s oil condition, this nitrification process will goes down , will go down . And rates of mineralization and nitrification proceed most rapidly at each pH near 
7 and decline as the soil become excessively acid or alkaline because the microbes become 
inactive wh en the soil becomes excessivel y acidic or alkaline in nature.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:58)  
 
Also, since nitrification is a microbial mediated process, th e rate is governed by factors that 
affect these biological activities such as ammonia in soil water, whic h inhibits the nitrification 
process, also temperature which we have already discussed , soil aeration in aerobic  soil and soil 
pH generally ranges from 4.5 to 10. But, we have discussed that optimum pH is from 7.5 to 8.5 
and of course, the soil moisture . 
So, these nitrification is highest when the soil moisture is conducive for the growth of the 
microbes, but, the law among all these the highest influence or the largest influence can be seen 
from the temperature. So, the optimum temperature for nitrificatio n is around 90 degree 
Fahrenheit , below 50 degree Fahrenheit, the rates slow rapidly and nitrification continues until 
32 degree Fahrenheit . 
So, soil temperature cannot be controlled, but because soil cools  in the winter, the nitrification of 
winter season  application will be reduced. So, basically the nitrification process slows down in 
the winter because soil becomes colder in winter. So, that is an implication of temperatur e in the 
nitrification process.  (Refer Slide Time: 19:26)  
 
And also nitrification  is governed by soil oxygen level, because it is an oxidation process and 
also the ammonium concentration. So, ammonium is required for nitrification because it  is the 
starting point . And oxygen is required in low concentration for the conversion of ammoni um to 
nitrate. However, for the conversion of nitrite to nitrate we require high amount of oxygen 
concentration , without oxygen there will be no conversion from nitrate to nitrate . 
Now, in  acidic soil bacteria nitrification may be inhibited and intermediat e forms of nitrogen 
such as nitric oxides are also produced during the nitrification process. Now, when conditions are 
ideal for nitrification nitric oxides and nitrous oxides are produced in low concentration. 
However, when nitrification has started, but the conditions are not ideal to complete the 
conversion of nitrite to nitrate the concentratio n of these two gases increases.  
So, lack of oxygen in an acidic soil can stop this nitrification process also. So, you should always 
keep in mind these factors wh ile taking a decision regarding the nitrification process, because 
nitrification is a complex interplay of different environmental factors and microbes . And one 
should have a clear idea about this nitrification process  so that maximum amount of nitrogen ca n 
be available to the plant otherwise there will be loss of nitrogen.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:19)  
 
So, you can see in this graph, there is a relationship between the soil temperature and relative 
nitrification. So, as the soil temperature increases, the re lative nitrification increases the percent 
of relative nitrification increases. So, that shows the importance of temperature in controlling this 
nitrification . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:39)  
 
Also in this graph, you can see the importance of temperature. So, a s the temperature increases, 
the nitrification process increases , the rate of nitrification increases. So, of course, when there is 
a very low temperature that reduces the nitrification process . (Refer Slide Time: 22:00)  
 
Also we can see that the influenc e of tillage on organic nitrogen in soil, so, of course, as we 
maintain the soil for long duration. So, of course, the nitrogen in soil will go down due to the 
tillage practices. So, when there is a tillage practices that influences the decomposition of 
nitrogen of organic matter and that creates the percent,  that basically reduces the percent  content 
of nitrogen in soil because of different types of decomposition process, because when there is a 
tillage practice that opens up the soil that helps in more ox idation of the organic compound and 
you know that nitrogen mainly present in organic form , 95 percent  inorganic form and when 
there is an oxidation that will reduce th e nitrogen content in the soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 23:03)  
 
So, here we can see an overv iew of these different processes. So, you can see there is a 
sedimentary organic matter which ultimately goes to enrich this organic nitrogen , from organic 
nitrogen mineralization process will convert , this will results in this ammonium ion , these 
ammonium  ion will go through nitrification process ultimately will produce these nitrate . And 
there are some ammonium containing mineral which will enclose these ammonium ion and there 
are some nitrate minerals also . 
Anyway this nitrate  will be assimilated by the plant and ultimately will convert again to organic 
nitrogen from this inorganic nitrate . And due to the denitrification process , the denitrification 
process generally occurs in the oxygen limiting condition that is anaerobic condition. So, in this 
anaerobi c condition microbes utilize this nitrate and ultimately convert  into these nitrogen gases 
and ultimately this nitrogen will go to the atmosphere and some amount of nitrogen will be again 
fixed to biological nitrogen fixation and ultimately goes to this or ganic nitrogen pool. So, this 
will show the conversion of different forms of nitrogen.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:32)  
 
And this is a snapshot of the soil nitrogen cycle . You can see we have already discussed all these 
things. So, the nitrogen gas goes through  the symbiotic nitrogen fixation ultimately goes to 
organic matter and this organic matter will be mineralized to form these ammonium ion, these 
ammonium ion will go through this nitrification process ultimately will produce these nitrite and 
nitrate , these nitrate will be up taken by the plant and when the plant dies it goes t o the organic 
matter pool also.  
So, and also the conversion of these ammonium to organic forms is a example of immobilization 
and immobilization also occurs from conversion of nitrate  to these organic matter forms . And 
while this nitrite getting converted into nitrate denitrification process can release the nitrogen in 
the atmosphere and also these nitrates is also very soluble in water and thereby lost from the soil 
through the leachi ng process . 
And ammonium ion depending on the soil pH gets also released into the atmosphere through 
ammonia gas and this is known as ammonia volatilization process . And this ammonium ion  is 
also being contributed by different types of industrial fixation.  So, this is showing the s napshot 
of soil nitrogen cycle.  (Refer Slide Time: 26:12)  
 
So, let us see what are the major forms of nitrogen losses in different mechanisms. So, we can 
see in case of denitrification process nitrogen mainly lost in the form of  nitrous oxide and 
dinitrigen gas.  In case of volatilization it is lost as ammonia gas . In case of leaching it is lost as 
nitrate because nitrate is highly soluble in water and  fixation is another process through which 
the nitrogen gets lost. So, ammonium is lost t hrough fixation process to different in  different 
minerals  which are present in the soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:56)  
 So, guys, these are the references of this lecture . And I hope that you have gained some insight to 
these soil nitrogen  cycle and  these related processes . We have discussed the important factors 
which govern  this nitrification and let us start from here and we  will discuss more about soil 
nitrogen dynamics in our upcoming lectures. Thank you. 