Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of  Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 08  
Soil Nitrogen for Plant Nutrition  (Contd.)  
(Refer Slide Time: 00: 22) 
 
Welcome friends to this t hird lecture of week two of this NPTEL  online certification course of 
Soil Fertility and Fertilizers . And in this week, we are talking about Soil Nitrogen for Plant 
Nutrition . We are going to start our Lecture 8 our third lecture of week two. And in our pr evious 
two lectures of this week, we have discussed about the , we discuss about what are the different 
inorganic forms and organic forms of nitrogen present in the environment and how they are 
related to plant nutrition, what are the available forms and wh at we have also seen the nitrogen 
cycle . 
And also we have seen we have discussed some of the important nitrogen processes in the soil 
like mineralization, then nitrification and also some sub strates  within the mineralization like 
amminization  and ammoni fication. And also we have discussed briefly about denitrification and 
also volatilization . We have seen the importance of carbon to nitrogen ratio for determining the 
mineralization as well as immobilization . We have also discussed the impact of different 
environmental factors like temperature and moisture nitrification process.  (Refer Slide Time: 02:00)  
 
So, in this lecture, we are going to cover this lecture , first of all stages of the nitrogen cycle , also 
we are going to discuss the levels of nitrogen av ailable to plan t based on microbial 
decomposition, we are also going to discuss factors of nitrate leaching, and factors controlling 
nitrous oxide emission from soils , and finally, different nitrogen loss mechanisms. So, these are 
the major concepts which we are going to cover in this week.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:25)  
 
And also these are the keywords which we are going to discuss the identification loss nitrous 
oxide emission, ammonia volatilization, eutr ophication and nitrogen uptake.  (Refer Slide Time: 02: 35) 
 
So, if we see the details of soil nitrogen cycle we can we have already discussed important 
processes. So, for example, there are different types of nitrogen inputs like fertilizers as well as 
atmospheric deposition we have discussed these in details . And then from there we have plant 
uptake and also from the organic form of nitrogen gets converted into inorganic forms by 
mineralization process and we get the ammonium fo rm. 
And this ammonium form  is either exchange and fixed in soil minerals or they u ndergo 
immobilization process and convert back to organic form of nitrogen . Some amounts of 
ammonium nitrogen will convert to a night try it as well as nitrate throug h the process of 
nitrification.  
And you know that there are several bacterias  which are re sponsible , from ammonium to nitrate 
Nitrosomonas is responsible and from nitrite to nitrate Nitrobacter  is responsible and these 
nitrate is either taken by the plant or the loss from the soil to the leaching process or they are 
back to the atmosphere by de nitrification process in anaerobic condition. So, ultimately they 
produce the nitrous oxide , and finally, the denitrification process they convert back into 
atmospheric nitrogen . 
And these ammonium is also converted , they also released in the atmosphere th rough ammonia 
volatilization process. So, these are the different stages of a nitrogen cycle we have dis cussed 
this already in details.  (Refer Slide Time: 04:26)  
 
Now, let us see some important concepts for nitrogen immobilization . Now, immobilization on 
the temporary tying up of nitrogen,  so basically immobilization can be termed as a temporary 
tying up of inorganic nitrous and by soil microorganisms, decomposing plant residues. So, it is 
not a strictly loss process. So, we cannot tell that immobilization  is a strictly loss of nitrogen as 
we can say in case of leaching , why? 
So, immobilized nitrogen will be unavailable to the plants for a time, but will eventually become 
available as residues,  decomposition proceeds and population of microorganisms decline . So, 
what happens that when immobilized are basically immobilization can occur in the microbes 
body . So, when the microbes die, they decompose their organic nitrogen decompose and further 
goes back to the environment  as inorganic form of nitrogen.  
So, fer tilizer nitrogen immobilization can be reduced by placing fertilizer below crop residues 
instead of incorporating fertilizer into the soil with residues . So, generally this strategy is being 
used for reducing the nitrogen immobilization. So, the producer c an accomplish this most 
directly by knifing  in anhydrous ammonia solution.  
So, here you can see that these graph is showing the activity of micro organism , changes in the 
activity of micro organism and plant available nitrate supply with respect to time . So, you can see 
temporal variation of these two aspects. So, we can see when we are ad ding organic material , so activity of the microorganisms will increase because organic matter will serve as a source of 
carbon or in other w ords source of energy for them.  
So, you will see that there is a boom of microbial population here, but at the same time plant 
available nitrate supply will decline because they will , when there is a population increase o f 
microorganism they will utilize this plant available nitrogen to i mmobilize and ultimately you 
will see there is sudden decrease of p lant available nitrogen supply.  
However, with the passage of time the population will further decrease with a concomitant 
increase in plant development nitrates supply because when the popu lation will die the 
decomposition process will convert this organic form  of nitrogen into further back to inorganic 
form. So, that is why the plant available nitrate  supply will also increase. So, this is how this 
immobilization is dependent on microbial p opulation and also presence of plant available , 
presence of different types of organic material  and, of course, to C:N ratio.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:59)  
 
Now, remember that that duration of the nitrate depression period during this immobilization, we 
can s ee here this is the nitrate d epression period. So, the duration of the nitrate depression period 
during immobilization depends on environmental factors such as moisture and temperature and 
the C:N ratio  of the residue . And we have discussed this in details , why? When there is high C:N ratio,  why? There is immobilization we have already discussed. So, 
remember that soil organic matter contains on average about 50  percent  of carbon and 5 percent  
of nitrogen. S o, the C:N ratio  is 10 is to 1. So, it is relative ly constant for organic matter. Now, 
the C:N ratio  or plant residue ranges from this 10 is to 1 for young leguminous plant tissue to as 
high as 200 is to 1 for straw or some grains.  
So, plant tissue low in nitrogen generally are more resistant to decomposi tion and require a 
longer time before the nitrogen is available to the plants. So, these are some practical implication 
of immobilization process.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:18)  
 
Now, the next important process in the nitrogen cycle is denitrification process.  So, when the soil 
is saturated with water that will remove all the air which are occupied there in the post space. So, 
saturating a soil with water will create an anaerobic condition . And in this anaerobic condition 
whatever nitrate is there in the soil w ill convert back to the various gaseous forms of nitrogen, 
which will be ult imately loss to the atmosphere.  
So, first it will convert it into the , nitrate will convert into nitric oxide then nitrous oxide and then 
dinitrogen . So, this process is known as denitrification. If you see that the name itself suggests it 
is a conversion of nitrate to other forms , so it is de nitrification. Now, denitrification occurs under 
oxygen limiting condition as I have already mentioned . When anaerobic bacteria use nitrate in  
respiration in the presence of carbon sources such as organic matter.  So, in the anaerobic condition there is no oxygen available for these bacteria, so, they utilize 
these nitrate and then they reduce this nitrate back to different gaseous form and ultim ately to 
nitrogen gas. So, low field areas  which are subject to ponded water for sustained period during 
the irrigation season often exhibit nitrogen deficiencies related to denitrification losses. So, of 
course, when there is a low lying soil area which a re saturated with water or ponded water that 
will create anaerobic condition . 
And of course, in this anaerobic condition there will be conversion of nitrate to nitrogen gas. So, 
here you can see first nitrate will convert into nitrogen dioxide then nitric oxide then nitrous 
oxide and finally to nitrogen gas and ultimately they will release back to the atmosphere. So, this 
process is that denitrification process . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:46)  
 
Now, denitrification losses from saturate soil will vary with temper ature and the amount of 
carbon or organic matter which is available. So, here you can see for different time days like 3 
days, 5 days and 10 days, if the temperature is 75 to 80 degrees. So, we can see that nitrogen loss 
is only 6  percent.  However, if the temperature is more conducive for the bacterial growth we can 
see 10 to 25  percent . 
So, as the time increases, and if the temperature is favorable for the growth of the microbes, then 
we can see that increase nitrogen loss for denitrification process. So, of course, this denitrifying 
bacteria becomes inactive when there is a high temperature. So, these as I have already told you this denitrification basically mediated through anaerobic microorganisms which convert these 
nitrate to nitrous oxi de and finally to nitrogen gas.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:55)  
 
So, also when these different types of gases like nitrous oxide released back into the atmosphere, 
they can create different types of hazardous climatic effects in troposphere and stratosphere. So, 
here we can s ee that these nitrous oxide or in other words these NOx  or nitrogen oxides are 
interfering with the ozone layer in the stratosphere and ultimately they are causing some 
damages in the stratosphere . Similarly, nitrous oxide has its effect on troposphere als o. (Refer Slide Time: 13:40)  
 
So, if we see the snapshot of these nitrogen cycle again we are sure that these nitrogen fixation 
goes through either through industrial process from here or through rhizobium through symbiotic 
nitrogen fixation and also thr ough a free living nitrogen fixing bac teria like Acetobacter. So, 
although basically fix the nitrogen,  atmospheric nitrogen into organic forms . 
And of course, these nitrogen and these nitrogen and from the industrial process the nitrogen 
fertilizer and fro m these rhizobium ultimately it goes through soil organic matter and from 
nitrogenous fertilizer, it also goes through different processes. And also you can see here 
denitrification occurs in the reve rse direction of nitrification.  
So, these nitrogenous fe rtilizer first it will convert it to ammonium form and these ammonium 
will go back to the nitrite and this nitrite will go to the nitrate , these nitrate will be up taken by 
the plant or they will be lost by leaching or they can go back to the atmosphere by  the 
denitrification process.  
So, this is how and from the soil organic matter the soil organic matter the source of soil organic 
matter is the bodies of microorganisms, plants as well as animals. So, this is how , I mean when 
we go for the crop harvest tha t will remove the nitrogen through harvesting. So, this is called 
crop removal . And here y ou can see fixation of nitrogen from rainfall . And so, different types of 
nitrogen mechanisms are described in this slide . (Refer Slide Time: 15:50)  
 
So, the nitrous  oxide emission is are generally governed by four major factors one is rapid 
change in temperature of course, and rapid changes in carbon , rapid changes in oxygen and rapid 
changes in nitrogen. So, rapid changes in carbon like addition of manure,  then graz ing, crop 
additional crop residues freezing thawing these will impact the nitrous oxide emission . 
Also rapid changes in oxygen like when there is a rainfall increased amount of rainfall will also 
help in nitrous oxide emission, then groundwater fluctuation , organic carbon inputs all these will 
play an important role for nitrous oxide emission. Then finally, rapid changes in nitrogen like 
fertilizer application , manure  application , grazing and crop residues these also have significant 
impact on nitrous oxide  emission.  So, these are major factors which are controlling the nitrous 
oxide emission.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:51)  
 
So, in these two plots we can  that irrigation of soil moisture  and fertilizer rates both controls the 
nitrous oxide emission from the soil . So, in this plot we can see that in the x axis we are plotted 
the hours and the y axis we have plotted the nitrous oxide emission. So, here this blue line shows 
100 kg of nitrous and with water for 12.5 millimeters of irrigation and here this red line is  
showing 100 kg of nitrogen without irrigation.  
So, of course, when there is a moisture that will increase the anaerobic condition and that will 
increase or augment the denitrification and nitrous oxide emission. Similarly, the total nitrogen 
application r ate as we increase from 0 to 50, to 1 00 to 150 , then 200 to 300 we can see there is 
concomitant changes or increase in total nitrous oxide emission also. So, that shows the impact 
of total net application as well as the moisture in the soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:08)  
 
Now, what is ammonia volatilization ? Ammonia when it lost I mean when there is a loss of 
ammonia into the atmosphere that is called ammonia volatilization . Technically, this ammonia 
volatilization is different from gaseous loss of applied an hydrous ammonia which is not retained 
in the soil. Instead, ammonia volatilization occurs when ammonium in the soil because of the 
pH, pH is the major controlling factor , so because the pH is converted to ammonia  which is lost 
as gas. 
So, due to the high p H when ammonium ion which is present in the soil converts into ammonia 
gas which is lost to the atmosphere this is called ammonia volatilization. Now, ammonia 
volatilization is normally only a problem with fertilizers containing urea, such as urea or urea 
ammoni um nitrate solutions.  
Now, what happens when urea is decomposed or hydrolyzed and enzymatic in soil to 
ammonium. So, here you can see this is urea which i s hydrolyzed to form the ammonium  ion and 
these ammonium ion in the alkaline condition they will  convert into ammonia gas and then will 
release back to th e atmosphere  and that will be  called ammonia volatilization.  (Refer Slide Time: 19:35)  
 
The another important nitrogen loss , pathway of nitrogen loss is nitrogen leaching, specifically 
nitrate lea ching because nitrate is among , this is  the major inorganic form of nitrogen which is 
generally lost while leaching. Now , for leaching nitrogen must be in water soluble mobile form 
and abandon enough to transport nitrogen t hrough the soil. Now, although ur ea and nitrite are 
mobile, neither exist in sig nificant concentration in soil.  
Nitrate is the nitrogen for most susceptible to leaching. So , nitrate leached below the root zone 
that is 4 to 6 feet for most agronomic crops will eventually leach downward unt il it reaches a 
saturated zone.  Nitrate leach below  4 to 6 feet is generally unrecoverable , so we cannot recover it 
back by most crop except deep rooted species. So, the rate of nitrate movement downward 
depends on a variety of factors for example, soil te xture, precipitation and irrigation amounts and 
crop uptake of water and nitrate.  
So, if we see there is a coarse textured soil for example, sandy soils, which is overlying a coarse 
texture d vadose zones, you know, what is the vadose zones, vadose zones  is a zone of material  
between the surface and the water table. So, if there is a nitrate leaching issue in this sandy soil 
core sandy soil , and of course, if there is a shallow aquifer, they can leave the root zone enter the  
aquifer in a matter of months.  
On the contrary, from upland silt loam soil overlying which is overlaying an aquifer of 100 feet 
or more that will take 25 to 30 years to reach the aquifer for the nitrates. So , depending on soil texture, and also the amount of water present, the nitrate mov ement basically changes from one 
soil to another soil. Nitrate  leaching is more in case of coarse texture d oil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:54)  
 
So, here you can see there  is an experimental results where we can see nitrogen leaching effect in 
the vadose zones  of irrigated continuous corn and pasture. So, you can see here this is the nitrate 
leaching for pasture and here this is the nitrogen leaching nitrate , leaching for corn.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:19)  
 Now, next important issue with nitrogen is eutrophication . Now , eutrophication is an 
environmental problem and it generally occurs when the water body any water body is become , 
any water but it becomes very rich with these nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus that will 
support the bloom of algae ultimately exh austing all the dissolved oxygen  and creating an 
oxygen depleted condition , we are g oing to discuss that in detail.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:58)  
 
 
So, what are the stages of the eutrophication ? There are generally four stages of the 
eutrophication, first st age you can see this is the excess of nutrients suppose you  are applying 
huge amount of NPK fertilizer in the soil and the ground and it will,  so, that will ultimately go to the water body . Second step is some nutrients become dissolved in water and leach are leak into 
the deeper soil layers eventually they get drained into the water bodies such as lake or  ponds.  
So, here you can see this is  a second pathway . Third is  some nutrients runoff from over the soil 
and ground directly into the water , so, this is a  third . Fourth one is the extra nutrient causes algae 
to bloom. So, there will be an algal bloom, when there is an excess amount of nutrient in the 
water body. Then in the fifth stage, sunlight becomes blocked by the algae when there is this of 
course we c an see the sunlight is getti ng blocked by this algal bloom.  
So, this is called algal bloom. And when there is an algal bloom photosynthesis and growth of 
plants under the water will be weakened or potentially stopped. Next, the algae bloom dies and 
falls t o the bottom of the water body, then bacteria begin to decompose and break down the 
remains and use up  all the oxygen in the process.  
So, whatever oxygen were dissolved in the water, the bacteria will eat up all these oxygen. So, 
the decomposition process caused the water to have reduced oxygen leading to dead zone. So, 
this is the eutrophication process. And when there is  dead zone, all the organisms which are 
present in the water will be negatively impacted becau se of loss of dissolved oxygen.  
(Refer Slid e Time: 24:56)  
 
So, here you can see these are the factors with the degree of influence on different loss 
mechanism of nitrogen. So , pH has high impact on volatilization . Salinity has high impact on volatilization . Texture has high impact on denitrificati on and leaching . Temperature has high 
impact on volatilization , of course, higher temperature higher volatilization . 
Organic carbon has higher importance on denitrification and among the weather parameters 
temperature has high impact on volatilization.  Wind speed has high impact on volatilization . 
Rainfall has high impact on denitrification as well as leaching . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:40)  
 
Fertilizer type has high impact on volatilization leaching . Amount of fertilizer will have high 
impact on denitrificatio n, volatilization and leaching . Placement has high impact on 
volatilization and then timing has medium impact on everything . Manure application has high 
impact on denitrification and crop management has almost low to medium impact . 
Cultivar has high impact  on leaching . Irrigation has high impact on denitrification as well as 
leaching . Drainage has high impact on denitrification as well as leaching and ground  cover has 
high impact on denitrification as we ll as only for denitrification.  (Refer Slide Time: 26 :31) 
 
So, if we want to see the annual fluxes of natural and anthropogenic reactive nitrogen in 
teragram per year we  will see this picture . So, here we can see that these nitrogen,  nitrogen 
oxides are releasing at 40 tera gram per year. So, due to biomass burning, and then due to the 
Haber -Bosch synthesis, through fertilizer we are adding 120 teragram of nitrogen per year and 
different losses of nitrogen , nitrous oxide and ammonia accounts for 13 , 5 and 60 teragram s. 
And fixation of the nitrogen accounts fo r 60 teragram s and then also here fixation 58 teragram s 
and denitrification 100 teragram s and then atmospheric deposition 70 teragram s and ocean 
deposition 30 teragram s. From ocean surface the release of nitr ous oxide and ammonia 5.5 and 9  
teragram . Denitrification from the ocean is 100 teragram s. So, and then the movement to the 
ocean from land surface is movement of nitrogen  from land surface to ocean is 80 teragrams. So, 
you can see that how the fluxes of nitrogen can be distributed in di fferent parts of  the ecosystem.  (Refer Slide Time: 28:10)  
 
Now, environmental problems associated with nitrogen fertilizer use . We can see groundwater 
contamination and basically this is due to the nitrate leaching. So, what are the mitigation 
strategies ? Judicious use of fertilizer , increasing efficiencies , nitrification inhibitors , we have 
discussed about the nitrification inhibitors in our previous lecture , coated fertilizer use , similarly 
eutrophication causes due to erosion and surface r unoff of groundwater discharg e. 
So, how to mitigate that reduce runoff , water harvesting , control irrigation , control erosion ? Then 
methaemoglobinemia is basically consumption of due to the consumption of high nitrate through 
drinking water and food. So, if you reduce the leaching los s of nitrogen  that will help to reduce 
this methaemoglobinemia.  
And then acid rain and ammonia deposition is basically the responsible mechanisms are nitric 
acid originating from reaction of nitrogen  oxides with moisture  in atmosphere and ammonia 
volatiliz ation. So, mitigation strategies reduce ammonium volatilization loss, decrease the pH of 
the soil , increase C EC, use fertilizer formulation and inhibitors . 
And then stratospheric ozone depletion is basically caused by nitrous oxide emission from soil 
globa l warming and the mitigation strategies are used of nitrification inhibitor , urease  inhibitor 
and we also if we can increase the nitrogen use efficiency that will also reduce the strato spheric 
ozone depletion effect.  (Refer Slide Time: 29:49)  
 
Now, plant nitrogen uptake . So, nitrogen is basically removed from the soil when it is taken up 
by the plant. So, plant nitrogen requirements vary depending on the plant species production 
system and phases of growth. So, as mentioned previously the nitrate form is t ypically the most 
abundant inorganic nitrogen form in the soil, but it is also more mobile. So, following the , so, 
there i s a concept of plant nutrition.  
So, the concept of plant nutrition says there is a four R concept . Four R means, right rate , right 
source, right replacement and right time. So, if we maintain the right rate of fertilizer , if we 
maintain right source of fertilizer, if we do the right placement of the fertilizer and we apply the 
fertilizer right time that will take care of holistically the  plant n utrition.  
So, following these four R's of fertilizer management, it can help ensure adequate concentration 
of soil nitrogen for plant uptake and growth while minimizing detrimental environmental impacts 
associated with excess mobile nitrogen in the  soil. So, plant basically can pick up this nitrate  and 
ammonium in some cases anhydr ous ammonia is also being used.  (Refer Slide Time: 31:04)  
 
So, this is a simplified view of nitrogen cycle in crop production and here from here you can 
have an idea abo ut the amount of nitrogen either is different inputs and outputs and fluxes or I  
woul d say how different soil nitrogen process are impacting the loss or gain of nitrogen we can 
have a very good idea you ca n see here volatilization loss.  
Ammonia is basicall y accounts for 20 teragram nitrogen per year . Crop removal 85 tera gram 
nitrogen per year . Inorganic nitrogen through fertilizer 83 teragrams nitrogen per year. So, these 
will give you an overview of how this nitrogen cycle is affecting the crop production and also 
estimated global nitrogen flows are mentioned here in each and every process.  (Refer Slide Time: 32:10)  
 
So, nitrogen inputs including from fertilizer and natural process also been called nitrogen 
removal efficiency and nitrogen inputs to the sy stem are basically denoted here by red arrow . 
Now,  for example, and also biological nitrogen fixation is biological, BNF is biological nitrogen 
fixation we have discussed . This n itrogen will cycle through the soil and these purple arrows are 
showing the im mobilization and mobilization or mineralization . 
And also susceptible to environmental losses , so these are the environmental losses like ammonia 
volatilization, nitrate runoff and nitrate leaching and are eventually used by the crops which are 
indicated b y this green arrow with a portion harvested or removed. So, this is crop uptake crop 
utilization finally, through crop removal, there is a loss of nitrogen from the soil. So, this shows 
nitrogen use efficiency basically we can calculate by nitrogen outputs  by nitrogen inputs, we are 
going to discuss these incoming slides i n incoming lectures in details.  (Refer Slide Time: 33:27)  
 
 
So, these are the references which I have used for this lecture. I hope you have got some good 
information in this lecture. L et us wrap up our lecture here and let us meet in our next lecture to 
discuss more about soil nitrogen process and plant nutrition. Thanks.  