Soil Fertility and Fertilizers  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 09  
Soil Nitrogen for Plant Nutrition  
 
Welcome friends to this fourth lecture of week two of NPT EL online certification course of 
soil fertility and fertilizers . And in this week, our topic is soil  nitrogen  for plant nutrition. In 
our previous lectures of this week,  we have already discussed some of the important 
processes of soil  nitrogen  and how soi l nitrogen  moves from soil to the atmosphere.  
And also , the we have also discussed the dynamics of soil  nitrogen . We have seen some and 
also, we have discussed some of the important soil  nitrogen processes, like, ammonification, 
then nitrification then mi neralization , nitrification , denitrification . So, in this week we are 
going to discuss some of the important nutrient use efficiency terms.   
(Refer Slide Time: 01:13)  
 
So, these are the concepts which we are going to discuss in this lecture that is differ ent 
nutrient use efficiencies and then how to calculate them. Secondly, we are going to see the 
economic response of  nitrogen  fertilization and, then we are going to discuss about use 
efficiencies of  nitrogen  in cereals. And then, we are going to discuss a bout the source of  
nitrogen  fertilizers or  nitrogen ous fertilizers and their general characteristics.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 01:45)  
 
These are some of the keywords which we are going to discuss. First of all, agronomic  use 
efficiency , apparent recovery eff iciency, then physiological efficiency,  nitrogen  deficiency 
and nitrate and  ammoniacal  fertilizers.  So, these are some of the keywords which we are 
going to cover in this lecture.   
(Refer Slide Time: 02:03)  
  
So, let us start with the nutrient use effici ency. Well, you must understand that whatever, 
nutrient is there in the soil, plant cannot take up all, of it. And, so only a certain percentage of 
that nutrient is available to the plant. And based on this recovery of those fractions of 
available nutrient s, which are present in the soil, there are different types of terms. For 
example, nutrient use efficiency, agronomic use, agronomic  efficiency and so on, and we are 
going to discuss these terms.   
So, first let us discuss what is nutrient use efficiency. I f you see this term that it is also, in 
short term, we call it NUE.  So, anyway is a critically important concept in the evaluation, in 
the evaluation of crop production system. This is a very important term. whenever we talk 
about the proper fertilizer man agement, it is very important to understand the  nutrient use 
efficiency.  
It can be more critical for  fertilizer elements like  nitrogen , because  nitrogen  is highly 
dynamic in soil system.  So, nutrient use efficiencies, of course a critically important conc ept 
in the evaluation of crop production system. At the same time, it can be greatly impacted by  
fertilizer management, as well as by soil and plant water management. Let me just increase 
the width and change the color.  Now the second important term is a gronomic efficiency. We also denote this agronomic 
efficiency  by this AE term.  So, this AE is calculated in units of  yield  increase per unit of 
nutrient applied.  So, this is called the agronomic efficiency. Now , it more close ly reflects the 
direct producti on impact of an applied fertilizer and relates directly to economic return.  So, 
agronomic efficiency is more closely related to the direct production, as well as the economic  
return .  
Now, the calculation of these agronomic  efficiency requires knowledge of  yield without 
nutrient  input. That means in the control led fertilizer, in control  plots . So, is only known 
when research plots with zero nutrient  inputs have been implemented on the farm.  So, these 
are called control plots.  So, only when we know the uptak e from the control plot, then only 
we can calculate this agronomic efficiency.  So, for calculating the agronomic efficiency, we 
declare the nutrient uptake from the control plot.   
(Refer Slide Time: 05:21)  
 
  
So, the third important concept is partial nu trient balance, or P NB. Now what is P NB? PNB 
is the simplest form of nutrient recovery efficiency, which is usually expressed as nutrient 
output per unit of nutrient input, which is also known as a ratio of removal to use and less 
frequently. It is also re ported as output minus input.  So, this is called partial nutrient balance. 
Another important term you will frequently, come across that is called partial factor 
productivity or PFP.   
So, it is a simple production efficiency expression, and it is calculated  unit of crop will per 
unit of nutrient applied.  So, it is easily calculated for any farm that keeps that keeps records 
of inputs and yields . So, this is called partial factor productivity. Now we know what is 
nutrient used efficiency, what is agronomic ef ficiency? What is partial nutrient imbalance ? 
And also, we have now, we now know what is partial factor productivity.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 06:43)  
 
 
So, another important term is apparent recovery efficiency or R E. So, it is a more complex 
term. It is a more complex expression of nutrient use efficiency, and it is most commonly 
defined as the difference in nutrient uptake in above ground parts of the plant between the 
fertilized and unfertilized crop relative to the quantity of the nutrient applied .  So, here you can see, we are calculating these by taking the difference between the nutrient 
uptake in the above ground parts of the plant between the fertilized as well as the unfertilized 
crop. That means from the control plot, which related to the quantity  of the applied nutrient . 
Another important  term is physiological efficiency.  So, this physiological efficiency or P can 
be, I mean, it is defined as the yield increase in relation to the increase in crop uptake of the 
nutrient in above ground parts of the  plant.   
So, again, it is basically yield increase in relation to the increase in crop uptake of the nutrient 
in above ground parts of the plant.  So, it considers the yield increase as compared to the 
increase in, crop uptake, by the above ground plants.  So, like this agronomic efficiency and 
this recovery efficiency, it needs a plot without application of the nutrient of interested to be 
implemented on the side, or in other words, for calculating the physiological efficiency , we 
also the control plot.  
It also requires  measurement of nutrient concentration in the crop and is mainly measured and 
used in research.  So, you can see that for calculating several of this term, we create a well-
designed  experiment in a farm so that we can calculate this nutrient us ed efficiencies.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:59 ) 
  
Now how to calculate these individual terms.  So, here it has been clearly given.  So, partial 
factor productivity, generally the unit is kg of product by kg of  nitrogen  applied.  So, we can 
see crop yield per unit of  nitrogen  applied . Agronomic efficiency , we know kg product 
increase by kg of  nitrogen  and applied.  So, crop yield increase per unit of nitrogen applied .  
The recovery efficiency that is fertilized crop nitrogen uptake minus unfertilized crop 
nitroge n uptake by nitrogen applied, or  when we call it, I mean, for example, if you consider 
this recovery efficiency for a particular nutrient suppose, this is  nitrogen . So, if you consider 
this recovery efficiency of  nitrogen , so we will  see that fertilized cr op nitrogen uptake  minus 
unfertilize d crop nitrogen uptake by  nitrogen  applied .  
So, here, all these calculations are being done based on  nitrogen and nitrogen  applied . So, 
increase in  nitrogen uptake  by the crop b y unit of  nitrogen  added and it is usually  for the first 
crop following application, and usually expresses a percentage or fraction.  So, this is 
recovery efficiency. Next is removal efficiency of  nitrogen . So, crop nitrogen  and removal by  
nitrogen  applied.   
So, nitrogen  removed by the harvested po rtion of the crop per unit nitrogen  applied, usually 
expresses a percentage or fraction, and finally physiological efficiency that is kg product 
increased by kg increase in fertilizer nitrogen  taken up.  So, we can see there is crop  yield  
increase per unit fertilizer  nitrogen  taken up.  So, this is how we can calculate these nutrient 
efficiency terms for  nitrogen  and for other nutrients also.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:03 ) 
 
 
Now let us move ahead and see another important term that is percent fertilizer recove ry. So, 
Percent fertilizer recovery is generally, denoted by this short PFR and this is NF minus NC 
by R. Now what is NF ? NF is total if let us consider that we are calculating these PFR for 
nitrogen.  So, these NF terms that no total crop nitrogen  uptake f or different crops like corn, 
wheat, rice, et cetera, from fertilized plots and NC stands for total crop nitrogen uptake  from 
unfertilized plots or control plots.   So, this is nitrogen  uptake from the fertilized plot minus nitrogen uptake  by the unfertili zed 
plot by the rate of fertilizer  nitrogen applied.  So, this will give you PFR or percent fertilizer, 
recovery of nitrogen . So, this is how we can calculate these individual terms if  by having  by 
inputting these uptake as well as yield and also the rate o f nitrogen  and inputs.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:23)  
 
 
So, if we can, if nitrogen  and use efficiency, as we know from our previous discussion, that it 
is basically  nitrogen  uptake by the plants by fertilizer  nitrogen  and minus receivable fertilizer  
nitrogen  in soil.  So, to be more precise than  nitrogen  use efficiency can be expressed as  
nitrogen uptake  by the plant by fertilizer  nitrogen  minus residual fertilizer  nitrogen  in the soil.  
So, if we can input these valves, we will  get the  nitrogen  use efficiency.   So, here you can see here, we both calculating the inputs of  nitrogen  as fertilizer, and also the 
residual fertilizer nitrogen  which is present in the soil.  So, it can be also described as nitrogen  
uptake by the plant by  nitrogen  uptake by plant plus  nitrogen  loss. So, nitrogen  use efficiency 
can be expressed either by this way or by this way. So, in the first, method, we are 
considering the  nitrogen uptake  by the plant by  fertilizer  nitrogen minus residual fertilizer 
nitrogen  in the soil.  
And in the se cond method, we are considering nitrogen  and uptake by the nitrogen  uptake by 
plant and nitrogen  and loss.  So, the current average nitrogen  use efficiency in the field is 
approximately 33  percent  and it is remembered that a substantial proportion of the re maining 
67 percentage is lost into the environment, especially in the intensively corrupt area.   
So, that is why  nitrogen  and management is a very important aspect of fertilizer management 
in the soil  and because 67, that means two third of the applied nit rogen in the soil get lost 
from the soil due to different types of processes and only 33  percent  of the applied  nitrogen is 
available to the plant.   
So, we can clearly see that it is a major concern and that is why scientists are doing research 
worldwide t o increase this nitrogen use efficiency in the plant to, I mean, in the soil, for the 
plant by using different types of measures.  So, we are going to discuss those in our upcoming 
slides.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:09)  
 
  
Now, if you can see one example belo w, you can see that, here we are having applied 
nitrogen 0 kg per hector , 50 kg  per hector , 100 kg per hector , 150 kg per hector , and we are 
getting 1000 kg yield per hector , 1300 kg, 2000 kg, 2000 kg. Subsequently , we know that 2  
percent , 2.1 percent, 2.2 percent, 2.3 percent are the grain nitrogen and nitrogen uptake  in kg 
per hector 20, 27.3, 44, and 46.  
Now, if we want to calculate the fertilizer recovery or nitrogen  use efficiency percentage, so 
you can see here that is, here in this case here, the nitrogen uptake  is 27.3 minus 20 , 20 is 
here nitrogen  uptake from the unfertilized plot . So, 20 divided by 50 that is applied nitrogen  
and so , 14.6.  So, you can see for all these different levels, we are putting these values of 20 to 
account for this nitroge n and uptake from the unfertilized plot or control plot and then we are 
basically dividing it by the applied nitrogen and to get the fertilizer recovery o r nitrogen  use 
efficiency.  So, this is how we can calculate this nitrogen  and use efficiency.  
 (Refe r Slide Time: 16:37)  
 
 
Now why we are concerned about use efficiency of  nitrogen  and in cereal.  So, if you can see 
this shows, the box plots of  agronomic efficiency and recovery efficiency of nitrogen  for 
three different crops, one is mai ze other one is rice and there is wheat.  So, if you can see the 
average a gronomic  efficiency, as well as the average recovery efficiency of maize  is highest 
followed by rice and wheat.   So, this is very important that we should be concerned about  nitrogen  use efficiency in the 
cereals , because you can see here clearly that the average values are remaining within around 
20 to 30  for these agronomic  efficiency remains for these three crop s, the mean agronomic  
efficiency of these three crop s remain in and around 20 to 30 and also here, the recovery 
efficiency is also, within only 30 to 40 percentage.   
So, this shows that why we should be very much concerned about efficiency of nitrogen  use 
efficiency specifically in cereals.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:11 ) 
 
 
Also, if we want to see the optimum nitrogen  and fertilization for better economic response, 
these graphs will give us some good idea.  So, here you can see, as we are increasing the  
nitrogen  and application in the X  axis, and we are getting the corn  yield, of  one is the red o ne is the corn following corn, and the green one is corn following soybean.  So, you can see that 
as we are increasing the fertilizer application from 150 pound per acre to 250, 200 pound per 
acre.   
So, we are not getting  the increase in E the corn yield or  subsequent economic optimum 
economic return is not increasing in a steeper slope.  So, that means we should be very, very 
careful to find the threshold where we should stop for the nitrogen  and application, so we can 
call it an agronomic maximum  nitrogen  and rate  and here you can see economic optimum  
nitrogen  and rate is getting, we are getting economic max optimum nitrogen  rate in and 
around when our fertilizer replication is around 150 pound per acre.   
So, that means we should not increase our fertilizer replication after a certain threshold, 
because our return will not be maximized in a similar proportion.  So, we should stop 
application there, here in the second grap h also, it is clear.  So, here you can see the  nitrogen  
rate difference from the economic r ate. So, if we are giving higher  nitrogen  than excess of 
nitrogen then from the optimum  economic rate, then we can see there is a plateau of relative 
chlorophyll meter  or relative sensor value.   
So, we will not get any higher yield, but if we did, if we ha ve a deficit amount of nutrient 
from this economic optimum  economic rate, we can get the reduction in yield.  So, that shows 
again, to find a sweet spot or find a threshold of  nitrogen used, where we should get the 
optimum economic return. Otherwise , these will not be sustainable for long duration. So, 
nitrogen  fertilizer application should consider this economic response very carefully, so that 
we can find the optimum threshold for nitrogen  application in the field.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 21:13)  
 
 
Now, her e also you can see this  is a scattered plot between grain yield by optimum  nitrogen 
rate in pound per acre. So, we can see this is basically economic optimum  nitrogen rate and 
corn grain yield level.  So, one thing is for sure that when the grain yield is f rom 100 to 
around 250, bushel s par acre , the maximum nitrogen  or optimum nitrogen , application is 
clustered around these 100 within 150 to 200.  
So, that shows that we should find a threshold value of which satisfy the maximum  grain 
yield. So, this basical ly further justifies the importance of considering the economic return 
when we apply the fertilizer nitrogen  in that soil.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:33)  
 
Now, what are the  nitrogen  deficiency symptoms in the plant? Now, the whole plant looks 
pale to yellow ish green and leave s start to wither and dry out. As you can see, the whole plan 
looks pale to yellow ish green and the leaves starts to wither and dry out turning yellow ish 
brown to brown . Early senescence of the older leaves . So, you can see these are the  older  
leaves .  
So, early senescence you can see, and also increased root growth and stunt ed shoot growth 
result s in a low shoot to root ratio.  So, these are some of the symptoms of  nitrogen  and 
deficiency in the plants. And these are some of the photograp hs you can see clearly that plant 
is turning, yellow as a result of  nitrogen  and deficiency.   (Refer Slide Time: 23:19)  
 
So, what are the important process when there is a  nitrogen  deficiency . Nitrogen , that is very 
mobile in both soil and plant and  nitrogen uptake  may be reduced, when the pH of the soil 
falls below,  0. So, nitrogen  in deficiency is very common but plants have developed, response 
mechanism to this nitrogen  and deficiency. And what are those response mechanism?  
The response mechanism is h ormonal up regulation of root growth and closing of aqua pores  
which results in shoot water stress and stunt ed shoot growth.  So, these are some of the  
mechanism s which plant have developed  when there is a  nitrogen  deficiency in the soil.   
(Refer Slide Time : 24:12)  
 
 So, there are different sources of nitrogenous fertilizer, inorganic nitrogen is fertilizer are 
produced by fixing  nitrogen  from the atmosphere and natural gas is used as that energy 
source and is a major component of the cost of nitrogen  fertilizers.   
(Refer Slide Time: 24:30 ) 
 
So, here, there are several classifications , these a re classification of nitrogenous  fertilizer s. 
You can see here, ammonium sulphate , which contains 20.5  percent  nitrogen  ammonium 
chloride, 26 percent  nitrogen , ammoniu m phosphate . So, these are the  ammoniacal  fertilizer. 
What are the nitrate fertilizer ?  
Sodium nitrate  which contains 16  percent  nitrogen , calcium nitrate  which contains 15.5  
percent  nitrate and both ammonium and nitrate form are containing in this fertili zer like 
ammonium nitrate which contains 33 to 34 percent of nitrous and ammonium sulphate  nitrate, 
calcium ammonium nitrate or CAN , these are fertilizers , nitrogen  as fertilizer s which contain 
both ammonium and nitrate form.  
Urea the most  widely used nitrogenous fertilizer is  it is an amide fertilizer and it contain 46  
percent  nitro gen. Calcium cyanamide contains 21  percent  nitrogen. N itrogen  solutions are 
being also used like anhydro us ammonia  contain 82  percent  nitrogen  and aqueous ammonia 
contain 20 to  25 percent  nitrogen  and so on . Slowly available fertilizers, nitrogen  fertilizers 
are there like urea formaldehyde compounds , urea form  and then oxamide, metal ammonium 
phos phate,  sulphur coated urea , CDU , then IBD U, thio urea .  
 These are  several variati ons of slowly available nitrogenous fertilizers and we are going to 
discuss this in our upcoming slides.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:03)  
 
But so , these are the basic classification of nitrogenous fertilizers. Now this flow chart shows 
that manufacture of nitro genous fertilizers. The major component is ammonia  when ammonia  
is reacted with the, we have discussed how we can produce the ammonia  by Haber and Bosch 
process.  So, when we react this ammonia with nitrate , nitric acid, and then ammonia, then it 
produce s the ammonium nitrate.  
Then sodium carbonate , when it react s with sodium carbon ate, we get sodium nitrate, calcium 
carbonate reaction produces  calcium nitrate, calcium carbon ate ammonium produce calcium 
ammonium nitrate . Ammonia  plus carbon dioxide produce urea. A mmonia  calcium sulphate  
produce ammonium sulphate , and the then so on so forth.  So, these flow chart shows the 
manufacturer of nitrogenous fertilizers.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 26:45)  
 
Now, if you see the general characteristics of  ammoniacal  fertiliz ers, they are readily soluble 
in water, and they are much more resistant to  the leaching  loss, and they are acidic in their 
residual effect. Now, there is a term called equivalent acid or EA.  So, this is basically the 
amount of calcium carbonate, which is required to neutralize the acidity developed by 
application of a 100 kg  fertilizers.   
So, there are several fertilizer s like ammonium sulphide, ammonium chloride . These are acid 
forming fertilizers.  So, when we apply these fertilizer s in the soil, they cre ate the acid ic 
condition.  So, to equivalent acidity is basically the amount of calcium carbonate or lime 
required to neutralize the acidity developed by application of a 100 kg of this fertilizer.  So, 
the equivalent acidity of ammonium sulphate  is 110 kg a nd equivalent acidity of ammonium 
chide is 120 kg.  (Refer Slide Time: 27:41)  
 
Now, nitrate fertilizers.  So, they are generally basic in residual effect, and they are also 
readily soluble in water and available to the plants. They are  highly mobile in so il can be used 
as top dressing or side dressing, and they are very much prone to leaching  process  I have told 
you, nitric  fertilizers are very much prone to leaching loss.  
And they are  also prone to denitrification loss under poor water management. We kno w what 
is denitrification loss, it is the conversion of nitrate to gases nitrogen  anaerobic condition.  So, 
these are some of the phases of nitrate fertilizer.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:20)  
 
 Now, there is another term called equivalent basicity. Now as these , since the nitrate fertilizer 
are basic in nature, there is a term called equivalent basicity.  So, the amount of calcium 
carbon ate equivalent to the basicity developed due to the application of 100 kg of the 
fertilizers . So, sodium nitrate is basically ha ving the  29 kg of calcium carbonate per 100 kg of 
fertilizer applied and 60 kg of calcium carbonate per 100 kg of fertilizer applied in case of 
ammonium nitrate.  So, these are equivalent basicity of these fertilizers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:00)  
 
Now , some  new fertilizer like CAN, calcium ammonium nitrate . They are having both the 
nitrate and ammonium , ammoniacal  nitrogen . So, they are readily soluble in water. They are  
suitable for use under wide variety of soil and cropping condition and they supply nitro gen 
both during early stage in the nitrate form as well as during the latest stage in the crop growth 
in the ammonia  form and they are acidic in the residual effect.   
So, equivalent acid ity, for example, in case of ammonium ni trate it is 60. In case of  
amm oniacal  ammonium sulphate  nitrate it is 93 and in case of CAN , that is calcium 
ammonium nitrate  which is a neutral fertilizer.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 29:43)  
 
And fourth one is the amide fertilizer.  So, these materials are carbon compound and are 
technicall y classified as organic compound like urea and they are available to the plants after 
hydrolysis. So, urea is a fertilizer, which is widely used by the farmers, and these are acidic in 
residual effect.  So, equivalent acidity of urea is 80 kg calcium carbon ate per 100 kg of urea 
and calcium cyanamide , which is having basic residual effect equivalent basicity is 63.  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:16)  
 
So, why we prefer urea and why urea is widespread because it has high nitro gen content, 4 4, 
46 percent . It has good physical condition. It is less acidic in residual effect compared to 
ammonium sulphate . It is less cost per unit of  nitrogen  in production storage and 
transportation, and, noncorrosive in nature. And finally , it is also suitable for fol iar applications.  So, these six advantages helped urea to become most widely used nitrogen ous 
fertilizers.   
(Refer Slide Time: 30:52)  
 
So, if we see the Indian scenario of  nitrogen  fertilizer consumption in all these three graphs, 
we can clearly see that percentage share of India in one fertilizer consumption over time is 
increasing since 1960 and if you see the companies of  nitrogen , phosphorus , and potassium 
consumption in India, of course, the  nitrogen  consumption has been increased more than 
phosphorus and potassium and NPK fertilizers are also having high consumption since 1970s , 
the last 50 years.  
And if you see the consumption of N fertilizer by different crops , of course , rice and wheat 
accounts for the major  share of consumption of nitrogenous fertilizer.   (Refer Sl ide Time: 31:39)  
 
So, guys, we have completed this lecture and I hope that you have got knowledge of some 
important terms  specifically the nutrient use efficiency terms and, these are the references. 
And, we will  start from here in the next lecture and we will discuss some of the important 
aspects of nutrient management  and fertilizer management, nitrogenous fertilizer 
management. Thank you very much.  