U.S. agricultural trade programs are designed to develop and expand commercial outlets for U.S. commodities and agricultural products, provide international food assistance, and offer U.S. consumers with access to a wider variety of foods at reasonable prices, including those not produced domestically.
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
APEC was established in 1989 to leverage the Asia-Pacific region's growing interdependence. APEC members or member economies(link is external) work together to facilitate trade and economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region.
International Organic Trade
The United States has trade arrangements with several nations to facilitate the exchange of organic products. These arrangements provide additional market opportunities for USDA organic producers. The National Organic Program works with the Foreign Agricultural Service and Office of the United States Trade Representative to establish international trade arrangements.
U.S. Agricultural Trade
U.S. agriculture looks overseas to boost domestic incomes by expanding existing markets access and opening new markets. The U.S. is the largest exporter of agricultural products in the world and is a highly competitive producer of many products.
Trade Policy
The U.S. is pursuing trade liberalization through trade negotiations and policies that boost prospects for food and agricultural markets in developing countries which stimulates economic growth and development. With access to growing markets, American producers will have greater opportunities to grow and develop their businesses.
USDA analyzes the economic implications of trade policies for U.S. and global agriculture.
Trade Agreements
The U.S. has a vast number of agreements governing trade with foreign countries. USDA provides access to these agreements listed by country.
Trade News and Data
USDA provides the latest news stories as well as data and statistics resources related to agricultural trade.
World Trade Organization (WTO) and Agriculture(link is external)
The WTO functions as the principal international body concerned with multilateral negotiations on the reduction of trade barriers and other measures that distort competition.
World Trade Organization (WTO) Brief
USDA reviews the successes of the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture (AoA). WTO member countries committed to reducing agricultural tariffs and increasing export subsidies and domestic support.
Office of the United States Trade Representative
The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) is responsible for developing and coordinating U.S. international trade, commodity, and direct investment policy, and leading or directing negotiations with other countries on such matters.