Pollinators
Each of us depends on pollinators in a practical way to provide us with the wide range of foods we eat.
Pollination services from honey bees and other insects provide the backbone to ensuring our diets are diverse and plentiful with fruits, nuts, and vegetables. In all, there are over 100 crops grown in the United States that depend on pollination. USDA supports the critical role pollinators play in agriculture through research and data collections, diagnostic services and pollinator health monitoring, pollinator habitat enhancement programs, and pollinator health grants.
2022 Annual Strategic Pollinator Priorities Report is now available!
Read the Report (PDF, 1.8 MB)
USDA Pollinator Offices and Initiatives
External Federal Pollinator Partners



Pollinator Fact Sheets, News and Blogs


2022 Annual Strategic Pollinator Priorities Report
A report on federally-led efforts to address factors impacting pollinator health.
Read the report (PDF, 1.8 MB)


What's All the
Buzz About?
See the impact of USDA's efforts focusing on pollinator health, crop production, and conservation.
View the infographic (PDF, 1.5 MB)

Beekeeper Resources
Fact Sheet
Programs and Resources
that support
Beekeepers
Read the fact sheet (PDF, 194 KB)


Native Plants for
Pollinators
Use this resource to learn
about pollinator-attractive
plants.
View the infographic (PDF, 1.1 MB)

The Buzz
About Pollinators
Protecting and supporting pollinators is key to
maintaining U.S. agriculture.
Read the blog


Meeting Honey Demand in the U.S.
This USDA dashboard helps visualize pollinator data and provides a clearer picture of trends.
Visit the dashboard(link is external)

More Pollinator Stories







Highlights
Access USDA resources on enhancing agricultural pollinator health and conservation.


How Farmers Can Help Pollinators

Online Identification Tools

Bee Disease Diagnosis Service

Honey Bee Research Monitoring Network

Honey Bee Surveys

Cold Storage Overwintering Tool

Establishing Pollinator Habitats

Honey Bees on the Move



More Highlights







Gallery
View our collection of pollinators, plants and apiarists.


















Interested in keeping up-to-date on the latest pollinator research opportunities and happenings? Sign up to receive the Latest Buzz!(link is external)