Raising livestock and producing animal products is half of U.S. agriculture. U.S. animal agriculture provides high quality, safe, nutritious food and products across the globe, adding value to crop and forage lands, supporting local economies, and efficiently utilizing global resources while continually maintaining a focus on the highest standards for animal care and wellbeing.
Animal Agriculture Resources by Sector and Species
General Agricultural Resources
Census of Agriculture (every 5 years, NASS)
Census of Aquaculture (every 5 years, NASS)
Agricultural Charts and Maps (includes Livestock and Animals, NASS)
Agricultural Statistics(link is external), annual (NASS)
Alternative Farming Systems Information Center (NAL)
Farm Bill Implementation
Farmer Assistance (FSA)
Disaster Assistance Discovery Tool
Disaster Assistance Programs at a Glance
Emergency Assistance for Livestock, Honey Bees, and Farm-raised Fish (ELAP)
Livestock Forage Disaster Program (LFP)
Livestock Indemnity Program
Noninsured Crop Disaster Assistance Program (NAP)
Farms and Agricultural Production Systems Resources (NAL)
Global Agricultural Information Network (FAS)
Global Agricultural Trade System (FAS)
Insurance Plans for Livestock and Forage (RMA)
Cattle - Livestock Gross Margin Insurance
Cattle - Livestock Risk Protection – Fed Cattle
Cattle - Livestock Risk Protection – Feeder Cattle
Cattle – Weaned Calf Risk Protection
Dairy Cattle - Livestock Gross Margin Insurance
Dairy Revenue Protection
Shellfish Crop Insurance
Swine - Livestock Gross Margin
Swine - Livestock Risk Protection
Apiculture – Rainfall Index
Forage – Pasture, Rangeland, Forage
Forage – Annual Forage
Forage – Forage Production
Livestock – Whole Farm Revenue Protection
Livestock – Micro Farm
Livestock, Dairy, and Poultry Outlook(link is external), monthly (ERS)
FIND Local Agriculture Data and USDA Resources (Local Dashboard)
SEARCH the USDA Economics, Statistics and Market Information System(link is external) (ESMIS, NASS)
World Agricultural Supply and Demand Estimates Report (WASDE, OCE)
USDA Partnerships with Tribal Nations
NRCS Programs for Tribes and Tribal Members
Alternative Livestock Resources
Animal Production Research
Aquaculture Resources
Cattle Resources - Beef
Cattle Resources - Dairy
Hog and Pig Resources
Insect Resources
Invasive Animal Species
Meat and Animal Product Resources
Poultry Resources
Range and Grassland Management Resources
Small Ruminant (Sheep and Goats) Resources
Animal Breeding and Genomics
USDA conducts and facilitates animal and aquatic species genetic improvement strategies across the globe. Development and early adoption of genomic and bioinformatics technologies support world-class efforts to expand the utility of animal genetic resources to produce high-quality, safe, accessible food and fiber. Genetic preservation is a key component of USDA animal breeding and genomics efforts.
Animal Breeding and Genomics Research
Rapid advances in technology and bioinformatics propel research in animal breeding and genomics to ever-expanding capabilities. USDA and Land-grant University researchers have uncovered unprecedented knowledge of animal genomes, allowing precise identification of genetic and epigenetic mechanisms that underpin characterization of diversity in animal phenotypes and which enhance response to selection for traits of economic, ecological, and societal value.
Animal Breeding, Genetics, and Genomics Research Funding (NIFA)
National Animal Germplasm Program (ARS)
National Programs including Animal Breeding, Genetics, and Genomics Research (ARS)
Animal Genome to Phenome Roadmap
Genome Editing and Genetic Engineering
Animal Health, Wellbeing, and Welfare
Animal health and welfare are important aspects of animal care and management. An animal is considered in good welfare if they are healthy, in a positive emotional state, and can express natural behaviors. Positive health and welfare promote the animal's mental and physical needs and increases their quality of life.
Animal Diseases








Animal Disease Surveillance, Prevention, and Management










Animal Health Research
Animal Wellbeing and Welfare

Antimicrobial Resistance
One Health
Pests and Parasites of Agricultural Animals (e.g., insect and parasite pests)


Pet Travel and Animal Transportation
Veterinary Services (APHIS)
Animal Nutrition and Feeding
Animal feeding and nutrition involves animal nutrient utilization for growth and reproduction, food product quality and safety, technical assistance and education for producers and professionals, natural resource conservation and contributions to mitigating effects of climate change.
Animal Nutrient Requirements
Feed Management
Nutrition Research
Animal Reproduction
Reproduction Research
USDA conducts reproduction research in livestock, poultry, and aquatic species through internal governmental agency (Agricultural Research Service (ARS) and outward focused government-funded competitive research grant programs (National Institute of Food and Agriculture).
Assisted Reproductive Techniques (NIFA)
Reproduction Research Funding (NIFA)
Climate Change, Sustainability, and Animal Agriculture
USDA supports agricultural-animal producers in their response and adaptation to the challenges of climate change to ensure a resilient and sustainable animal production system. USDA scienceprovides the foundation for many climate solutions. Financial and technical assistance that support the implementation of conservation practices enable producers to contribute to reducing greenhouse gases and improving carbon storage. Producers are on the front line of climate change and USDA aims to provide the information, tools, resources, and programs necessary to ensure the sustainability, health, productivity, profitability of America’s animal agriculture.
Climate and Sustainability Resources
Food Safety of Animal Products
Consumers, communities, industry and government all work together to prevent foodborne illness. Take steps to ensure your food is safe by learning best practices for how to buy, prepare and store food safely.
Food Safety Resources
Markets, Economics, and Trade (Domestic and International)
USDA collects and publishes a wide range of data and information on domestic and international markets including forecasts, production figures, and trade statistics. We aim to provide farmers, producers, ranchers, and industry stakeholders with the information they need to make informed production and marketing decisions.  Additionally, this information supports research efforts, informs policy and programs, and fosters transparency in the marketplace.
U.S. Domestic Agricultural Markets and Economy
U.S. International Trade and Foreign Agricultural Markets
Wildlife
Wildlife plays an important role in maintaining a healthy and functional ecosystem. USDA wildlife programs provide scientific information and research on wildlife, its habitat, and its relationship to agriculture and public health and safety, including disease programs and habitat management support for landowners.
Wildlife Resources
Additional Animal Research Resources
USDA provides funding opportunities to advance knowledge in both fundamental and applied sciences important to animal agriculture. Supported project areas include animal health and production, animal systems, aquaculture, and insect pests.
USDA Science and Research Strategy
Agriculture Network Information Collaborative(link is external) (AgNIC)
Animal Use Alternatives in Animal Research (National Agricultural Library, NAL)
SEARCH the National Agricultural Library’s Collections
Animal Research and Funding Opportunities
USDA ARS Animal Research Units
Additional Farm Animal Resources, Risk Management, Technical and Financial Support
Additional Resources and Support
Animal Sector Check-Off Associations
Risk Management