  e-Connectivity for all rural Americans is a modern-day necessity.
Reliable and affordable high-speed internet e-Connectivity, or electronic connectivity, is fundamental for economic activity throughout the US. Access to high-speed internet is vital for a diverse set of industries, including agricultural production, manufacturing, mining, and forestry and acts as a catalyst for rural prosperity by enabling efficient, modern communications between rural American households, schools, and healthcare centers as well as markets and customers around the world.
Unfortunately, 22.3 percent of Americans in rural areas and 27.7 percent of Americans in Tribal lands lack coverage from fixed terrestrial 25/3 Mbps broadband, as compared to only 1.5 percent of Americans in urban areas, according to a recent report by the Federal Communications Commission.
USDA is Investing in Rural Broadband
USDA has been investing in rural telecommunications infrastructure for decades. Hundreds of millions of dollars are annually available in the RUS programs both by loans and grants all to support modern broadband e-Connectivity in rural communities.
In 2018, USDA introduced the ReConnect Program, which has invested over $1 billion to date to expand high-speed broadband infrastructure in unserved rural areas and tribal lands.
This new funding option was created by the United States Congress in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018, which authorized $600 million for an ambitious initiative to rebuild America’s infrastructure. In FY 2019, Congress added $500 million to the Program, and in FY 2020 and FY 2021, Congress appropriated an additional $555 million and $635 million, respectively. The ReConnect Program policies and procedures were codified in the April 2021 ReConnect Regulation.
See current programs
What is e-Connectivity
Increased
Productivity
Improved
Operations
Enhanced
Healthcare Options



Educational
Opportunities
Competitive
Entrepreneurship
Next Generation Precision Ag & Broadband Report
USDA embarked on a groundbreaking analysis about the potential benefits of rural broadband infrastructure and emerging on-farm technology for modernizing the United States’ agriculture industry and all who depend on its success.
We found that enhancing digital agriculture technologies already in use today - and increasing producers’ usage to full-scale - could create at least $47 billion each year in additional gross benefit for the U.S. economy. Rural broadband e-connectivity is the driver of more than one-third of that potential value, equal to $18 billion of annual economic improvements for our nation.
Read the report (PDF, 2.5 MB) released in April 2019 that describes how Next Generation Precision Agriculture technologies can be deployed together with high-capacity, reliable Internet services to America’s farms and ranches, including:
How e-connectivity creates value through digital transformation
The potential impact of Internet-connected agricultural technologies to the U.S. economy
What the agriculture ecosystem needs to unlock this value
Proposed strategies to make this potential a reality
FCC and USDA Working Together for Precision Agriculture
In June 2019, the Federal Communications Commission announced the formation of a new task force dedicated to advising the Commission on policies aimed at delivering connectivity so that American agriculture producers can use and benefit from precision agriculture. The new federal advisory committee, formally called the Task Force for Reviewing the Connectivity and Technology Needs of Precision Agriculture in the United States, works with the U.S. Department of Agriculture to provide the FCC with outside, expert advice on the needs and impact of telecommunications policy on the deployment of agricultural technology. The USDA serves as an ex officio non-voting member and acts as a consultant and resource to the FCC as they manage this important mission for rural America.
Resources
e-Connectivity Toolkit
An easy-to-use guide to USDA resources such as grants, loans, partnerships and in-person consultations, that support e-Connectivity and aim to help you find the opportunity that best fulfills their need.
Learn more
Rural Development Broadband ReConnect Program
This innovative program furnishes loans and grants to provide funds for the costs of construction, improvement, or acquisition of facilities and equipment needed to provide broadband service in eligible rural areas.
Learn more
American Broadband Initiative Progress Report
This report outlines the roadmap for how the Federal Government is working to increase broadband access and actions that Agencies are taking to increase private-sector investment in broadband.
Learn more
Stay up to date
Sign up for updates on
Rural Broadband e-Connectivity
Subscribe(link is external)