Climate Change Affects U.S. Agriculture
and Rural Communities
Climate change presents real threats to U.S. agricultural production, forest resources, and rural economies. Producers and land managers across the country are experiencing climate impacts on their operations through shifting weather patterns and increasingly frequent and severe storms, floods, drought, and wildfire.
Learn more
These threats have significant implications—not just for farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners—but also for surrounding communities and all Americans.
The Department is developing a comprehensive strategy centered on voluntary incentives that is inclusive for all agricultural producers, landowners, and communities, and that builds on the (PDF, 561 KB).
  Agriculture Plays a Critical Role
in Delivering Climate Change Solutions
The American agriculture sector has an incredible potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, sequester carbon, and deliver lasting solutions to the climate crisis.
America’s producers are already leading the way. In recent years, carbon stored in cultivated cropland soils increased by more than 8.8 million tons annually (PDF, 1.9 MB) thanks to their voluntary conservation efforts. Farmers, ranchers, and forest landowners are ready, and USDA offers resources to help.
Learn more
  Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities
Funding Opportunity
USDA is investing up to $2.8 billion in 70 selected projects under the first pool of the Partnerships for Climate-Smart Commodities funding opportunity, with projects from the second funding pool to be announced later this year. This effort will increase the competitive advantage of U.S. agriculture both domestically and internationally, build wealth that stays in rural communities, and support a diverse range of producers and operation types.
Learn more
  Combatting the Causes and Effects of Climate Change
Since January 2021, USDA has announced a suite of updates to the Department’s programs, positioning farmers, ranchers, forest landowners, and rural communities to be leaders in emissions reductions and carbon sequestration and supporting them in managing the impacts of climate change.
Learn more



  USDA Resources and Tools
USDA offers a variety of resources and tools to support farmers, ranchers, forest landowners, partners, and rural communities in making informed, science-based decisions to support climate change mitigation and build climate resilience.
Learn more
 