Plant Breeding Research
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) conducts plant breeding activities both internally and through publicly funded programs. Plant breeding at the USDA encompasses activities that conduct, sponsor, or analyze the human-aided development of new plant varieties or plant populations.
USDA Plant Breeding and Resource Videos
Corn(link is external)
Strawberry(link is external)
Wheat(link is external)
National Plant Germplasm System(link is external)
USDA Plant Breeding Programs
Agricultural Research Service
Forest Service
National Institute of Food and Agriculture
Natural Resources Conservation Service
USDA Plant Breeding Priorities
A Plant Breeding Stakeholder Meeting was held in the fall of 2020 to help identify stakeholder needs and focus USDA plant breeding priorities, and the 2021-2026 Roadmap was synthesized from the stakeholder input.
External Federal Partner Resources
This video developed by CropLife and the American Seed Trade Association provides a journey through the history of plant breeding and its modern applications. Plant Breeding Innovation - YouTube(link is external)
Plant Breeding Roadmap
Plant breeding is human-aided development of new plant materials with needed characteristics. Plant breeding plays a key role in addressing long-term climate-change mitigation and resilience, and in nutrition security.
USDA 2021-2026 Plant Breeding Roadmap
Focus on crops and markets that currently or soon will have impact on public cultivars and/or public pre-breeding germplasm and ensure genetic resources for specialty crops that meet the economic, cultural, and nutritional needs of all Americans
Address the entire breeding cycle in an integrated way, with balanced, appropriate effort and investment in phenotyping, genotyping, and selection phases
Examples of specific audience uses of the 2021-2026 Roadmap
Acknowledgments and Glossary
Promoting Fair Competition and Innovation in Seeds and Other Agricultural Input Industries
“More and Better Choices for Farmers" is a response to President Biden's Executive Order 14036, which directs Federal agency actions to enhance fairness and competition across America's economy. The report, published in March 2023, synthesizes input from public comments, listening sessions, and academic scholarship to make recommendations and propose strategies for ensuring that the intellectual property system, while incentivizing innovation, does not also unnecessarily reduce competition in seed and other input markets.
Plant Diseases
Control strategies that are effective, affordable, and environmentally conscious are continuously being developed by USDA to reduce losses caused by plant diseases that are effective and affordable while maintaining environmental quality.
Plant Diseases National Program
Plant Protection and Quarantine
Molecular Plant Pathology Lab
National Plant Board (NPB)(link is external)
Plant Health Research
USDA conducts plant health research and monitoring and provides resources to protect threats to our food supply and to our Nation's economy.
Beltsville Agricultural Research Center
Agricultural Online Access (AGRICOLA)
Plants Database
Plant Photo Gallery
National Institute of Food and Agriculture Horticulture Programs
Agricultural Network Information Center (AgNIC)(link is external)
Pest Management
USDA provides technology to manage pest populations below economic damage thresholds by integrating strategies that are based on increased understanding of the biology and ecology of insect, mite, and weed pests.
Pest Detection
Remote Pest Identification Program
Pest Lists
Invasive Species and Pest Management
Pest Management
Office of Pest Management Policy
Pest Management Resources
National Agricultural Pest Information System(link is external)
Weed Management
USDA's Noxious Weed Program seeks to prevent the introduction of non-indigenous invasive plants in the U.S. and to prevent the spread of newly introduced invasive plants. USDA's noxious weed activities include exclusion, permitting, eradication of incipient infestations, survey, data management, public education, and (in cooperation with other agencies and state agencies) integrated management of introduced weeds, including biological control.
Weed Policy
Weed Fact Sheets
Federal Noxious Weed List (PDF, 134 KB)