The U.S. Department of Agriculture, through its Rural Development mission area, provides financial resources and support for rural communities, residents, and businesses. We are deeply committed to improving the economy and quality of life in rural America. We offer loans and grants to eligible individuals, businesses, and communities, encouraging homeownership, growth in business and manufacturing, and community well-being. We also partner with private lenders to offer loan guarantees, providing the backing of the federal government to support rural prosperity and growth.
Affordable and Safe Housing
Multifamily Housing assists rural property owners through loans, loan guarantees, and grants that enable owners to develop and rehabilitate properties for low-income, elderly, and disabled individuals and families as well as domestic farm laborers.
Learn more about Multifamily Housing Programs.
Well built, affordable housing is essential to the vitality of communities in rural America. Rural Development’s Single Family Housing Programs give families and individuals the opportunity to buy, build, or repair affordable homes located in rural America. Eligibility for these loans, loan guarantees, and grants is based on income and varies according to the average median income for each area.
Learn more about Single Family Housing Programs.
Essential community infrastructure is key in ensuring that rural areas enjoy the same basic quality of life and services enjoyed by those in urban areas. Community Facilities Programs offer direct loans, loan guarantees and grants to develop or improve essential public services and facilities in communities across rural America. These amenities help increase the competitiveness of rural communities in attracting and retaining businesses that provide employment and services for their residents.
Learn more about Community Facilities Programs.
Economic Development and Business Support
Business Programs provide financial backing and technical assistance to stimulate business creation and growth. The programs work through partnerships with public and private community-based organizations and financial institutions to provide financial assistance, business development, and technical assistance to rural businesses. These programs help to provide capital, equipment, space, job training, and entrepreneurial skills that can help to start and/or grow a business. Business Programs also support the creation and preservation of quality jobs in rural areas.
Learn more about Business Programs.
Our energy programs, authorized by the Agricultural Act of 2014, offer funding to complete energy audits, provide renewable energy development assistance, make energy efficiency improvements and install renewable energy systems. We have programs that help convert older heating sources to cleaner technologies, produce advanced biofuels, install solar panels, build biorefineries, and much more. USDA Rural Development is at the forefront of renewable energy financing, with options including grants, guaranteed loans and payments.
Learn more about Energy Programs.
Infrastructure Investment
Learn more about Telecom Programs.
Through Rural Utilities Service Water and Environmental Programs (WEP), rural communities obtain the technical assistance and financing necessary to develop drinking water and waste disposal systems. Safe drinking water and sanitary waste disposal systems are vital not only to public health, but also to the economic vitality of rural America. Rural Development is a leader in helping rural America improve the quality of life and increase the economic opportunities for rural people.
Learn more about Water and Environmental Programs.
Rural Partners Network
The Rural Partners Network (RPN) was created by the Biden-Harris Administration to ensure opportunities reach rural America. Since it was established in April 2022, RPN has transformed the way the federal government works with and listens to rural people. In alliance with other federal agencies, RPN is helping rural people leverage and identify critical resources so their communities can thrive.
As a one-stop hub for rural programs, funding announcements, technical assistance, and rural stories, Rural.gov helps rural people access and navigate federal opportunities and resources. With RPN staff living and working in rural communities they serve, they are building strategic partnerships and engaging with leaders to drive community and economic growth and prosperity.
To learn more, follow RPN on Twitter(link is external) and explore Rural.gov.
Rural Data Gateway
The Rural Data Gateway strengthens USDA Rural Development partnerships with rural people, entrepreneurs, government officials and Congress by making RD’s data more available and easier to access. It features Rural Investments Dashboards that significantly expand access to RD financial data through an easy-to-use interface that allows data from more than 65 RD programs to be viewed and downloaded. The Gateway and dashboards will help USDA get more resources to the people who need them in rural places.
Farm Bill Titles
Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (2018 Farm Bill)
Title VII – Rural Development
Title XI - Energy