At the core of USDA's mission is fostering economic opportunity and innovation that will continue to help American agriculture grow and thrive in a global economy. Through research, data and analysis, trade agreements, grants and programs that add value to products, USDA works to expand and maintain both foreign and domestic markets for American farmers, ranchers and agribusinesses.
Market Development and Research
Strengthening and expanding markets for American agricultural products not only helps U.S. farms and businesses thrive, it also helps improve the quality and variety of foods available to consumers around the world. From local and regional foods to grades and labeling, all of USDA's market development efforts foster economic growth while keeping consumer needs and expectations as a top priority.
Supporting Exports
In a global marketplace, supply and demand in one area of the world can greatly impact the agricultural production in another. American products are shipped world-wide, and USDA works with nations around the globe to solidify and increase trade opportunities for U.S. farmers and businesses.
Trade Policy
USDA works with foreign governments, international organizations, and the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative to establish international standards and rules to improve accountability and predictability for agricultural trade. USDA helps facilitate trade policy by:
Monitoring both bilateral and multi-lateral trade agreements, to help ensure that U.S. agriculture reaps the full benefit of trade agreements.
Partnering with other U.S. government agencies and the private sector in international trade negotiations aimed at eliminating trade barriers and establishing transparent and science-based trading standards.
Responding to World Trade Organization (WTO) notifications from foreign countries on sanitary, phytosanitary and technical measures that affect agricultural trade.
Analyzing policies and regulations of major trading partners and examining the impacts of various trade agreements on member countries' agricultural sectors.
Monitoring the safety and quality of products coming into the U.S. from foreign trading partners is one of the many ways USDA helps protect the American consumer.
Learn more about trade policies and regulations, trade agreements, and international trade negotiations.
Marketing and Trade Assistance Programs
Export Financing Programs
Farmers Market Promotion Program
Federal State Marketing Improvement Program
Market Development Programs
Specialty Crop Block Grant Program
Publications and Reports
Amber Waves Magazine
Current World Production, Market and Trade Reports
Farmers Markets and Local Food Marketing Publications and Presentations
Grain Inspection and Weighing Services
USDA Agricultural Projections to 2021 (PDF, 450KB)
World Agricultural Supply and Demand Estimates