USDA assists urban, small-scale, and innovative producers with growing, processing and selling. We provide technical and financial assistance for a variety of growing operations, including community farms and gardens, rooftop, indoor, and vertical farms, and hydroponic, aeroponic, and aquaponic facilities.
These operations provide healthy, local food, encourage economic development, provide employment and on-the-job training, expand community greenspaces, foster community collaboration, build climate and disaster resilient communities, and are an essential part of a resilient diversified food system.
Funding
Grants
Apply Here - deadline April 9, 2024
Cooperative Agreements for Composting and Food Waste Reduction
Innovative Production
Get Involved
Federal Advisory Committee
RSVP for April 10, 2024 meeting(link is external)
People’s Garden
Partnerships
Stay Informed
Newsletters
Additional USDA Support and Resources
News
Resources
Contact Us
Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
The Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production’s mission is to include urban, small-scale, and innovative producers in USDA’s support of American agriculture in all its forms. The Office coordinates across USDA agencies to update programs and engage with stakeholders to determine and adapt to the needs of producers.
Grants
Grants are available to initiate or expand efforts of farmers, gardeners, citizens, schools, cities, tribes, and other stakeholders to increase food production, provide training and education, support infrastructure needs, encourage climate resilient practices, and more.
Learn more about Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Grants.
Cooperative Agreements for Composting and Food Waste Reduction
Cooperative agreements help local and tribal governments develop infrastructure and strategies for composting and food waste reduction. Preference is provided to projects that make compost easily accessible to agricultural producers, integrate plans to save and reuse food waste, anticipate economic benefits, and provide collaboration with multiple partners. Proposals require a 25% match, which can include in-kind contributions.
Learn more about Composting and Food Waste Reduction Cooperative Agreements.
Federal Advisory Committee
This committee advises the Secretary of Agriculture and the Director of the Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production on the development of policies and outreach relating to urban, indoor, and other emerging agricultural production practices as well as identifies barriers to urban farmers and agricultural innovation.
Learn more about the Federal Advisory Committee for Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production.
People’s Garden
The People’s Garden is a growing network of gardens nationwide, including one at USDA headquarters in Washington, D.C. They empower communities to join, grow and teach about gardening in a sustainable way and the benefits of resilient, local food systems.
Learn more about The People’s Garden.
Partnerships
The Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production partners with a variety of agencies and stakeholders to support and further the goals of urban, small-scale, and innovative production producers.
The Office coordinates an Internal Advisory Committee, made up of representatives from agencies across USDA, to provide USDA-wide coordination and messaging. This coordination allows the Office to provide recommendations to agencies for program and policy updates, outreach, and identify linkages with other programs that may not be explicitly focused on urban agriculture, small-scale and innovative production.
In addition, the Office partners across the Federal government and conducts outreach with a variety of external stakeholders to reach a broad audience and ensure fairness in program delivery.
Newsletters
The Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production releases a monthly newsletter that includes funding opportunities, helpful resources, and updates from around the country. Sign-up to receive the newsletter and other announcements at farmers.gov/urban. View our current and previous issues:
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #14(link is external) (03/22/2024)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #13(link is external) (02/16/2024)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #12(link is external) (01/23/2024)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #11(link is external) (01/01/2024)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #10(link is external) (11/18/2023)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #9(link is external) (10/12/2023)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #8(link is external) (9/18/2023)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #7(link is external) (8/9/2023)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #6(link is external) (7/14/2023)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #5(link is external) (06/15/2023)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #4(link is external) (05/09/2023)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #3(link is external) (04/12/2023)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #2(link is external) (03/10/2023)
Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production News #1(link is external) (11/28/2022)
Additional USDA Support and Resources
USDA offers a wide variety of programs and services to urban, small scale, and innovative producers to help them start, expand, and improve their operations. The Urban Agriculture at a Glance brochure highlights USDA programs and resources available to customers, partners, entities, and their communities.
Additional USDA support includes conservation, disaster assistance, crop insurance, and safety-net programs. Learn more at farmers.gov/urban.
Urban Hubs in select cities, further assist urban, small-scale, and innovative producers. The USDA has established Urban Service Centers, Flagship People’s Gardens and partnerships with Community-Based Organizations in the following cities:
Albuquerque, NM
Atlanta, GA
Chicago, IL
Cleveland, OH
Dallas, TX
Detroit, MI
Grand Rapids, MI
Los Angeles, CA
Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN
New Orleans, LA
New York, NY
Oakland, CA
Philadelphia, PA
Phoenix, AZ
Portland, OR
Richmond, VA
St. Louis, MO
Farm Service Agency Urban County Committees are located in the above cities, as well as these recently added cities:
Little Rock, AR
Denver, CO
Boston, MA
Kansas City, MO
Jackson, MS
Las Vegas, NV
Pittsburgh, PA
Columbia, SC
Memphis, TN
Houston, TX
News
March 19, 2024: Applications for USDA Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Grants Due April 9
January 25, 2024: USDA Invests Approximately $11.5 Million in Composting and Food Waste Reduction Projects in 23 States
November 6, 2023: 2023 Farm Service Agency County Committee Elections Open This Week
October 31, 2023: Urban and Innovative Producers, Public Invited to Attend November Meeting of Federal Advisory Committee for Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
October 2, 2023: USDA Offers New Crop Insurance Program for Producers Using Controlled Environments | RMA
July 21, 2023: Biden-Harris Administration Announces Investments in Urban Agriculture, Food and Market Access through President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda
July 18, 2023: USDA Invests $7.4 Million in 25 Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Efforts
July 6, 2023: Urban Producers, Public Invited to Attend August Meeting of Federal Advisory Committee for Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
June 15, 2023: Farm Service Agency Now Accepting Nominations for Farmers and Ranchers to Serve on Local County Committees
March 21, 2023: NIFA Invests $9.4M in Urban, Indoor, and other Emerging Agricultural Production Research, Education and Extension Initiative | National Institute of Food and Agriculture (usda.gov)
November 10, 2022 News Release: Urban Producers, Public Invited to Attend November Meeting of Federal Advisory Committee for Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
November 9, 2022 News Release: 2022 Farm Service Agency County Committee Elections Open This Week
October 26, 2022 News Release: USDA Invests $14.2 Million in 52 Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Efforts
August 24, 2022 News Release: USDA Announces Up to $550 Million in American Rescue Plan Funding for Projects Benefiting Underserved Producers and Minority Serving Institutions that Create Career Development Opportunities for Next Generation Leader
June 22, 2022 News Release: USDA Partners with Reinvestment Fund to Invest $22.6 Million to Increase Equitable Access to Healthy Foods Across Country
June 3, 2022 Press Release: USDA Advances Food System Transformation with $43 Million for Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production, Adds New Urban County Committees
Resources
December 7, 2023 Blog: Can I Grow Here? Helping Urban and Innovative Growers Navigate Local Policies
Fact Sheet: USDA Urban Agriculture Programs at a Glance
Fact Sheet: Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production Grants Fact Sheet (PDF, 2.6 MB)
Fact Sheet: USDA Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production: Reducing Food Waste (PDF, 746 KB)
Sign up for E-mail updates on Urban Agriculture(link is external)
Farmers.gov Blog: Urban Farming Posts
Contact Us
Office of Urban Agriculture and Innovative Production
1400 Independence Avenue, SW.
Washington, D.C. 20250-0170
Email: urbanagriculture@usda.gov
For more information on USDA and urban agriculture, visit www.farmers.gov/urban or email us at urbanagriculture@usda.gov