U.S. aquaculture production is growing because demands for healthy seafood products are increasing.
Global stocks of wild-caught seafood have remained stable over the last 20 years, and a growing world population projected to reach over 9 billion in 2050 is expected to exacerbate the demand for seafood products. USDA is providing leadership to ensure that a healthy, competitive, and sustainable aquaculture sector can produce an abundant, safe, and affordable supply of seafood products. USDA activities include:
supporting economic development that creates jobs and opportunities in rural communities;
designing aquaculture production systems that use aquatic resources for farming while maintaining healthy ecosystems;
supporting and conducting research, education, and extension activities that train a skilled work force and support the development of new aquaculture technologies;
overseeing aquatic animal health; and
providing marketing programs that educate consumers on the nutritional benefits of seafood products and the sustainable management of responsible aquaculture production.
Given USDA’s extensive portfolio of programs supporting aquaculture, the Office of the Chief Scientist, agencies in the Research, Education, and Economics mission area, and the USDA Working Group on Aquaculture sought to provide the domestic aquaculture industry an opportunity to communicate on how USDA can best serve this farming community. In November 2020 USDA agency representatives, as part of an Aquaculture is Agriculture Colloquium, held six virtual “Deep Dive” listening sessions (in addition to an APHIS-WS special webinar for shellfish farmers) to engage stakeholders on the subjects below.
Deep Dive Topic
Event Information
Aquaculture Production Research
November 30, 2020: hosted by NIFA and co-hosted by ARS
Aquatic Animal Health
November 10, 2020: hosted by APHIS and co-hosted by ARS and NIFA
Environmental Management
November 9, 2020: hosted by NRCS and co-hosted by APHIS, ARS, NIFA, and OCE
Production Innovation and Technology
November 20, 2020: hosted by NIFA and co-hosted by ARS and ERS
Product and Consumer Marketing
November 20, 2020: hosted by AMS and FNS
Supporting Aquaculture
November 16, 2020: hosted by RD, FSA, and RMA
Bird Management and Coastal Shellfish Production
February 17, 2021: Hosted by APHIS-WS
These sessions were attended by representatives from USDA, other government agencies, academia, and the private sector. On December 11, 2020, USDA hosted a “Aquaculture is Agriculture: USDA’s Role in Supporting the Farmers of Fish, Shellfish, and Aquatic Plants(link is external)” (videos 14-22) webinar including plenary presentations from USDA leadership and industry representatives and report-outs from listening session hosts on feedback provided to USDA. The Colloquium provided context for both stakeholders and USDA leadership on how to strengthen domestic aquaculture. USDA leaders and scientists heard directly from aquaculture stakeholders—farmers, scientists, and supporting industries—on prioritized industry research needs, critical needs for resource investments, and how accountability for these investments could be evaluated.
A white paper (PDF, 546 KB) summarizing these events and stakeholder recommendations for how USDA can best serve aquaculture stakeholders can be found here. The agenda for the plenary webinar is below, including links to presentation recordings.
Aquaculture is Agriculture
December 11, 2020 Webinar
Time Presentations
9:00 am
Welcoming and Opening Remarks(link is external)
Mary Dee Beal, Former Senior Advisor to the Secretary
Dr. Scott Hutchins, Former Deputy Under Secretary for Research, Education and Economics
Dr. Chavonda Jacobs-Young, ARS Administrator, USDA Acting Chief Scientist
9:30 am
Aquaculture Aligns with the Ag Innovation Agenda and the Science Blueprint(link is external)
Dr. Peggy Biga, Office of the Chief Scientist
9:50 am
USDA’s Role in Updating the National Aquaculture Development Plan(link is external)
Dr. Jeffrey Silverstein, Agricultural Research Service
10:10 am
Aquaculture Intersects with Agriculture(link is external)
Dr. Dan Northrup, Benson Hill
10:30 am
Economic Development through Aquaculture(link is external)
Andrew Jermolowicz, Rural Development
10:50 am
What U.S. Aquaculture Needs from USDA: Aquatic Plants(link is external)
Stephanie Showalter-Otts, J.D. University of Mississippi School of Law
11:10 am
What U.S. Aquaculture Needs from USDA: Finfish(link is external)
Jim Parsons, Cooke USA
11:30 am
What U.S. Aquaculture Needs from USDA: Shellfish(link is external)
Bill Dewey, Taylor Shellfish
11:50 am
Breakout Session Reports(link is external)
Dr. Caird Rexroad, Agricultural Research Service
12:00 pm
Aquaculture Production Research
Dr. Amrit Bart and Christopher Green, National Institute for Food and Agriculture
12:10 pm
Aquatic Health
Dr. Kathleen Hartman, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
12:20 pm
Environmental Management
Dr. Gene Kim and Jan Surface, Natural Resources Conservation Service
12:30 pm
Production Innovation and Technology
Dr. Tim Sullivan, and Christopher Green, National Institute for Food and Agriculture
12:40 pm
Product and Consumer Marketing
Dr. Carl Schroeder, Agricultural Marketing Service
12:50 pm
Supporting Aquaculture
Andrew Jermolowicz, Rural Development; Christopher Vazquez, Farm Service Agency; and Alex Sereno, Risk Management Agency
1:00 pm
Closing
Dr. Peggy Biga, Office of the Chief Scientist
For more information, please contact:
Caird Rexroad
USDA ARS National Program Leader for Aquaculture
caird.rexroadiii@usda.gov