Micro Irrigation Engineering 
Prof. Kamlesh Narayan Tiwari 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology-Kharagpur 
 
Lecture - 27 
Numerical Example on Design of Drip Irrigation System 
 
Dear participants of this course on micro irrigation engineering, now I am inviting 
you to lecture 27. Lecture 27 is dealt with tutorial class 5. This tutorial class is on the 
design of a drip irrigation system. We have given the theoretical aspect of the design 
of the drip irrigation system. So here numerical problem and then how drip irrigation 
system design can be made by a given set of data. 
 
So a question is given here for the design of a drip irrigation system which is to be 
done for a citrus crop of a 1-hectare orchard area with a length and breadth of 100 
meter each. This crop has been planted at a spacing of 5 meter by 5.5 meter and pan 
evaporimeter data will be used to estimate the water requirement of the crop. So pan 
data is given. This is during the summer month. This is during the peak demand 
period. 
 
So value is given as 8 millimeter per day. There are other relevant data to this 
problem. The system is to be laid on sloping land and then the slope has been 
provided in the upward direction from south to north direction. The water source is 
located at a southwest corner of the field and it is a well. Soil is sandy loam in texture 
and content of different proportions of clay, silt, and sand these are also given. 
 
Field capacity is 14.9%. Wilting point is 8%. The bulk density of the soil is 1.44 gram 
per cubic centimeter. The effective root zone depth is 120 centimeter. And from crop 
point of view, the area to be wetted by drip emitter is 40% that is the percentage of 
wetted area. The pan coefficient is 0.7. Crop coefficient 0.8. And then static water 
level, static water head that is 10 meter. And pump discharge is 2.5 liter per second. 
So these are the data which are relevant to this particular field. Maybe some data we 
will need at the time of design. So we need to assume which will be relevant to this 
particular situation. 
 So when we come to the solution the first most point to be considered is an estimation 
of the water requirement of the crop. So we will be estimating the ETc of the crop and 
this ETc is nothing but the evapotranspiration requirement of citrus crop which can be 
estimated from the pan data. So we have been given the value of evaporation from the 
open pan that is 8 mm, pan coefficient is 0.7, and then crop coefficient is 0.8. 
 
And if we multiply all these parameters, then one can get ETc in millimeter per day. 
This ETc in millimeter per day can be converted to a liter per day if we multiply with 
the area of each individual plant. But in drip irrigation system, we are not wetting the 
entire area. So area that we will multiply with the percent wetted area. So the area 
covered by each plant is 5 m into 5.5 m and the percentage wetted area is also given 
to us. 
 
That is 40% or 0.4 and then the evapotranspiration requirement of the crop which we 
have calculated as 4.48 mm per day. So this is equivalent to when we are multiplying 
this we will get in cubic meter per day. So this cubic meter per day is converted in the 
form of a liter per day. So which is coming as 49.28 liter per day or 50 liter per day. 
So this way we will get for each plant, we need to supply water of 50 liter per day. 
 
Now, this 50 liter per day is to be given water with the help of a drip emitter. So it 
comes for the selection of appropriate size of the drip emitter and this will be selected 
based on considering the soil texture. So, soil is sandy loam. Crop root zone system 
means up to what depth the water is going. So this information is also given. This is a 
crop which is a deep-rooted crop, 1.2 meter. 
 
And then, so considering if we are giving a dripper of the 4 liter per hour and since 
water requirement is large, this 50 liter per day. So one dripper will not be enough, 
but we have to provide a sufficient number of drippers and then this water is to be 
given in this flow rate that this is the characteristic so that the wetting can be made. 
 
So we have selected three drippers which are placed in a triangular system or 
triangular pattern so that the effective root zone area of the crop can be wetted. So 
three drippers of 4 liter per hour will deliver in 1 hour 12 liter of water. So this 12 liter 
of water when it is supplied, will require 4 hours 10 minutes to give 50 liter of water.  
So means one plant or all number of plants, each plant which are coming in the one-
hectare area, we have to operate the drip system for 4 hours 10 minutes. This is one of 
the important information which we have generated when we are considering three 
drippers of 4 liter per hour. 
 
Now in the question, it is given the well is located at the southwest corner of the field. 
So this is the thing that somewhere the field means well is located at the southwest 
corner. So this is a pump house and then water is pumped by using a pump. And then 
we are connecting with the help of a pump, drip system. 
 
So the from the pump water is taken to the filter and then here there will be all control 
head assembly will be installed means a filter, a fertigation unit all that it will be 
installed there. And from there we are connecting the main pipeline. So, it is coming 
to the main pipeline and we are bringing this main pipeline is 50 meter. 
 
Now here this is one of the layouts it can be made in otherwise also it would have 
been taken from your main goes here and then you are connecting main up to bring it 
up to this place and then sub-main can be brought. So it is the arrangement one has to 
see where the minimum size means the length of the pipeline is adjusted so that the 
cost does not go high. 
 
At the same time, one has to see that energy used for making such pipeline 
arrangement, it is minimum energy is consumed so that the pump can be also of a 
smaller size. So this is one of the arrangements which has been considered in the 
present design. And so after the main is brought up to the center and then the sub-
main pipeline is attached. So sub-main can be laid from the center of the field. 
 
So this is your sub-main part, which is connected from the main pipeline and then it 
goes up to the 97.25 meter of the length of the field. So, 97 we are not taking up to the 
end of the field means we are able to reduce means 2.75 meter length. Because the 
plant part of the area is when we are adjusting considering the spacing between the 
roots. And then lateral are laid on both the sides. 
 So means, the one lateral you can see on either side of the sub-main pipeline, laterals 
have been attached. So when we are making the length you can see here the main 
pipeline is 50 m, the sub-main pipeline is 97.25 m, and then the lateral is 47.5 m. S o 
this way, we are making the layout, and then because the size of the field is known, so 
we know what will be the length of these pipelines. 
 
Now laterals are connected on both sides of the sub-main. This is the way one can do 
and reduce the length so that the emission uniformity can be m aintained. If the length 
of the pipeline is very large, then with the means when you are delivering the water so 
discharge is decreasing with the space. This is especially varied flow with decreasing 
discharge problem. 
 
So when the water is being delivered, there will be more head loss and then it may 
happen that the emission uniformity may be reduced means water is coming out of 
these drippers it may not get adequate pressure at the end. So it is better to have a 
shorter length of the pipeline. So up to 100 m, there is as such no problem. 
 
But if we reduce the length of the pipeline, we will get better uniformity of water 
application. So this way each lateral when we are giving that each lateral will provide 
water to 10 number of citrus plants. 
 
So this way we are getting the number of plants which can be irrigated with the help 
of drip. Now we will work out what is the discharge through each lateral. So first of 
all let us try to know that what is the discharge through each lateral. So first we will 
calculate the number of lateral. So a number of lateral is given by, 100 m is the width 
of the field. Let us see that once again the layout. So the layout it says that you can 
see here the 5 m is the spacing between the plants and 5.5 m is the spacing between 
the rows. So this 5.5 m which has been used that will decide that how many number 
of laterals will be coming in 100 m long field. So this is coming that 18 number of 
laterals will be required. So total number of laterals because it is on both the sides. 
 
So on one side, it was 18. So both the sides, it will be 2 into 18 that a 36 number of 
laterals. Now, we found out there will be 10 number of plants on each lateral. So 
discharge carried by each lateral is, because there are three emitters of 4 liter per hour that is given to each plant. So there are 10 plants. So, discharge carried by each lateral 
is 10 into 12 that is 120 liter per hour, which is equal to 0.33 liter per second. So per 
hour is changed to per second. 
 
Now we will also know that what is the total discharge of 36 laterals. So total 
discharge by carried out by the 36 lateral is 120 into 36. So this is coming as 4320 
liter per hour which is equivalent to 1.22 liter per second. 
 
So this way one can get the discharge of 36 lateral. Now each plant is provided with 
three emitters. So, therefore, the number of emitters will be 36 into 10 into 3. So 1080 
this is another important information which we are getting. So for the one-hectare 
area, the total number of drippers are 1080. 
 
Now we have been given discharge of a pump as 2.5 liter per second. This data will 
be used to find out how many sub-main manifolds are required. So if we take the 
discharge of the pump as 2.5 liter per second, this is equal to 9000 liter per hour. So 
the number of laterals that can be operated by each manifold. So we have got if you 
once again see the previous part that we have got 120 liter per hour is the discharge 
carried by each lateral. So we will be getting that how many number of laterals that 
can be operated with the given pump discharge. So this is given as we are getting 75. 
So the pump which is available with us is able to meet the requirement of 75 number 
of laterals. 
 
So means this one manifold is enough, rather more than enough I will say that will 
meet the water supply to all the laterals at a time. Now having given this data which 
we have worked out we will now find out the size of the lateral. So once the discharge 
carried by each lateral is known, then the size of lateral can be determined by 
estimating the head loss due to friction. 
 
And this could be estimated by any one of the equations. So one means it could be by 
Hazen-Williams equation or by Darcy-Weisbach equation. These two equations are 
commonly used. So this head loss due to friction from 100 m long pipeline using 
Hazen-Williams equation can be given by  F)() (1022. 1)100(871. 4852. 1
12  DCQHf
 
So Q is the discharge, C is a constant that depends on the type of pipe material. The 
value of C, changes with the type of pipe material as well as the size of the pipeline, 
means the diameter of the pipeline. And then D is another part that is the diameter of 
the pipeline, and F refers to the reduction factor. So we will be substituting the value 
and having the appropriate units of these as it is given in the constant. So we will use 
the value. 
 
So first let us work out the reduction factor. Here reduction factor is due to the 
number of outlets provided in the lateral pipeline. So the number of outlets, we know 
there is 10 number of plants in each lateral and in 10 number of plants, for each plant, 
there are three drippers. So the number of outlets this is equal to the 30. And then we 
have the value this is  
  )( 61
21
11
2Nm
N mF
 
This m is the constant which is used in the Hazen-Williams equation. So m value will 
be used and capital N is the number of outlets. So we are substituting the value of m, 
and capital N, and then the value of the reduction factor is estimated and this value is 
coming as 0.367. 
 
Now head loss due to friction in 100 m pipeline we are substituting the value of Q and 
then C that is a capital C. So this is in liter per second means Q is in liter per second. 
Capital C is 130. And then the diameter of the pipeline is assumed as if we are using 
12 mm size that is the diameter of the pipeline and 0.367 is the reduction factor. 
 
So we are getting the value of head loss due to friction from 100 meter pipeline is 
0.54. Now in the actual field situation in our problem, we know that the length of the 
lateral pipeline is 47.5 m. So we will work out for 47.5 m, what will be the equivalent 
head loss due to friction in the lateral pipeline. 
 
So equivalent head loss due to friction in the lateral pipeline when we are multiplying 
with this 47.5 divided by 100 with 0.54, we get the value as 0.26 m. So permissible head loss due to friction is 10% of 10 m. That is the head required to operate the 
dripper which is delivering 4 liter per hour. So, therefore, 12 mm pipeline which has 
been selected is adequate. So this is the one part that is this pipeline of 12 mm is 
adequate to use the design part. 
 
Now we are coming to the discharge from the sub-main pipeline and as well as 
selecting the head loss due to friction for finding out the size of the sub-main pipeline. 
So total discharge from a sub-main pipeline is the number of laterals multiplied by 
discharge from a single lateral. So the number of laterals, there are 36 laterals. And 
then discharge of each lateral is 120 liter per hour. 
 
So this is coming to 4300 liter per hour, which is equivalent to which is equal to 1.2 
liter per second. Now if we assume the diameter of the sub-main pipeline is 50 mm. If 
capital D is assumed as 50 mm, the value of the parameter of the Hazen-Williams 
equation we because the pipe size it is not the same material, we used capital C as 130 
for lateral which is of LLDPE material, linear low-density polyethylene. 
 
Here the pipe material could be another you know it could be PVC, it can be HDPE. 
So the value of C is 150. Q is known that is 1.2 liter per second. The diameter of the 
sub-main pipeline is assumed as 50 mm. And this is the unit constant that is 1.22 into 
10 is to power 12. And F has been calculated by using the same reduction factor 
formula. 
 
So here we are substituting the value of F, which is coming for the 36 number of 
laterals. This is 36 number of laterals. So N is 36 number of laterals here, so we will 
multiply with 2 means we will get the expression for 36 number of lateral head 0.364. 
So head loss due to friction from 100 m sub-main pipeline when we are substituting 
the value we are getting 0.31 m for 100 m pipeline. 
 
Now since this pipeline is of 97.25 meter, so accordingly the value of the head loss 
due to friction is 0.30 m. Instead of 0.31 now it is 0.30 m. So the frictional head loss 
in the sub-main pipeline is 0.30 m. So head required at the inlet of the sub-main 
pipeline, which will supply water to the lateral pipeline. So we will know that what is the total head required. So this is coming as the head required to operate the emitter is 
10 m. 
 
Head required Hf of lateral, this we have calculated, that is head loss due to friction in 
the lateral pipeline is 0.26 m. And the head loss due to friction in the sub-main 
pipeline is 0.30. The slope is, if you see the field, let me just show you once again the 
layout. So the slope is in this direction means from south to north direction. And it is 
coming up to 97.25 m in the length. 
 
So it is almost 0.4 m in the length. So this which we are getting here. So what we are 
seeing here the slope is 0.4 m. So total head loss at the inlet of the sub-main pipeline 
is 10.96 m. Now let us try to know that how much pressure variation it can have. So 
when we are getting the pressure variation, what we are doing here we have got 10.96 
and then 10.26. So 10.96 minus 10.26 divided by 10.96. So if you work out you will 
get the pressure head variation is 6.38%. So, 6.38% is very less value, which is 
coming here. 
 
So we can see whether can we go far lower size pipeline so that we can reduce the 
cost. So estimated head loss due to friction in the sub-main pipeline is lesser than the 
recommended 20% variation. Hence, we are reducing the size of the pipeline from 50 
mm to 35 millimeter. So when we take this lower size pipeline means 50 to 35 
millimeter, we get head loss due to friction as 1.75 meter. 
 
So Hf for 97.25 m will be 1.70. Now we will work out when we have reduced the 
pipe size what is the value of the head requirement at the inlet of the sub-main. So 
initially we were getting 10.26, it is now 12.36. Let us know that how much is the 
pressure variation we are getting. So now we are getting 17% pressure variation. This 
is also within the permissible limit. So we can reduce the cost of the sub-main 
pipeline if we go for 35 mm pipe size. 
 
Now we will work out the size of the main pipeline. So here we are considering the 
size of the main pipeline as 50 mm and then we are considering the same Hazen-
Williams equation and because there is only one sub-main, which is receiving water from the main. So here except diameter, the rest of the parameters are the same. So 
we are assuming the diameter as 50 mm. 
 
The rest of the parameter means C because it is made up of the same plastic material 
HDP E. C is taken as 150. And Q is equal to 1.2 liter per second. D is 50 mm and K is 
the unit constant. So we are substituting and we get the value for 50 mm pipeline, 
which is 0.84 m when the pipe size is of 100 m. Now, this is 50 m. So half of this will 
be the head loss due to friction that is 0.42 m. So pressure head variation lies within 
the 20% of 12.36. So we accept this value of the pipeline size that is 50 m pipe of 50 
mm diameter is giving the head loss due to friction of 0.42 m. So this is acceptable. 
 
Now we will work out what should be the horsepower requirement of the pump to 
supply water in drippers in all the laterals. So here assuming the head variation due to 
uneven field and the losses due to pump fitting as 10% of other losses. So means, this 
is known as a local loss that is 10% of all the other values. 
 
So we are substituting the value, which means, H emitter that is head required to 
operate the emitter is 10 m. We have got the Hf value of the lateral that we have 
calculated. We know the slope of the field. We know the head loss due to friction in 
the pipeline. So all these things are equal to 12.36 m. And Hf from the main field is 
0.42. And then 10 m is the head it is given. And 1.28 is all the losses. So we get 
24.06.  
 
Now horsepower requirement can be calculated by using the expression as the total 
dynamic head H which is here all these components which are explained here that is 
the head required at the inlet of the sub-main pipeline is 12.36 plus head loss due to 
friction in the main pipeline plus H static plus H local. 
 
So this is 24.6 in meter and then discharge in liter per second. So this value we have is 
1.2 liter per second. So 1.2 is the discharge and 24.06 is the head divided by 75 into 
pump efficiency which is assumed as 60%. So, we are getting the horsepowe r 
requirement is 0.64. So available size in the market is 1 HP which is enough to 
irrigate the whole field. 
 So one horsepower pump is adequate for operating the drip system to irrigate a 1-
hectare area of citrus crop. In fact, it can meet the essential other requirements  also 
this pump can take care when the requirement of the additional area because it is 
giving the pump, is of higher size. 
 
So these are all the design calculations which we have got. We have taken the emitter 
of 4 liter per hour and then the total number of the emitter will be required in 1080. 
The length of one lateral is 47.5 and then the total number of lateral will be 36. So one 
can calculate the, what is total length of lateral pipeline which will be needed. 
 
So 36 into 47.5 will give us the total length of the lateral which is 12 mm in diameter. 
So the length of the sub-main means length of the sub-main is 97.25 m, which is of 35 
mm in dia. And then the length of the main pipeline is 50 m which is 50 mm in 
diameter. And then the horsepower requirement of the pump is 1 hp. 
 
So like this, you know similar other problem you can work out by referring the books 
which are given in these references. 
 
Let us summarize this particular lecture. We worked out the design o f the drip 
irrigation system by taking one numerical example. Like this, you know this is a 
wide-spacing crop. And the similar kind of problem can be worked out for the close-
growing horticultural crops like vegetable crops which are of close-growing crops 
where the spacing is less perhaps, which will require more you know discharge. 
 
It will require more number of drippers. It will require more length of the pipeline. So 
there you can have the optimization. And problem how to get the best layout where 
horsepower requirement, as well as the total energy requirement, can be reduced. 
Now forthcoming lecture it will be dealt on fertigation lecture we will discuss in the 
coming class. So thank you very much. 
 
 
 
 
 