Micro Irrigation Engineering 
Prof. Kamlesh Narayan Tiwari 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology-Kharagpur 
 
Lecture - 29 
Fertigation Application Methods 
 
Hello participants, I welcome you to lecture 29 of Micro Irrigation Engineering 
subject. This lecture is on fertigation application methods. We discussed in previous 
lecture 28, about the importance of fertigation, different types of fertilizers and in this 
lecture, we will discuss about different devices which are used to apply fertilizer using 
these devices. 
 
So in this particular lecture, the methods of fertigation application, relative 
comparison of these methods of fertigation, and how to design the fertigation system 
will be dealt. 
 
So when we are applying fertilizer or chemicals which are dissolved or soluble in 
water. This can be applied through using a Venturi injector or by using a pressurized 
fertilizer tank where there is an arrangement of bypass system or using an irrigation 
pump. So these devices are used.  
 
Let us discuss in detail about all three types of devices, how do they function. So as 
the name says that it is a Venturi injector. So, Venturi, that it is a constricted passage. 
There is a constricted passage and in this passage, the water or fertilizer solution is 
being sucked. So the high flow velocity of water in the constriction, it reduces the 
pressure. 
 
I will show you the diagram where you will see that why the pressure gets reduced 
and velocity increases. So this pressure it becomes sub- atmospheric pressure. So 
fertilizer solution is sucked from an open tank into the constriction through a small 
diameter tube. The process of injection of fertilizer can be explained by using the 
energy equation which is involving Bernoulli ’s principle and assuming the inlet and 
outlet ports of the Venturi are kept at the same elevation. 
 So if you look at the Bernoulli equation, it is the pressure head plus velocity head plus 
elevation head is constant. Means, when we are taking if any particular head is 
reduced the other component increases. This is the basic principle because the right 
side of the equation is constant. So suppose the elevation head is zero, then pressure 
head and velocity head equal to constant. 
 
Or we can say when the pressure head is less the velocity head will increase. So the 
different means your symbols here it is used. P refers to the pressure, V refers to the 
velocity, Z refers to the elevation and this is a gamma which is the unit weight of 
water, and G is the acceleration due to gravity. 
 
So the rate of flow in the Venturi system can be regulated by using the valves. So here 
there are valves and these valves can be regulated, this could be regulated so as to 
allow the water flow. This is what you see here how the water is being supplied along 
with the fertilizer. So this is a fertilizer container and then using this Venturi it is 
attached here. 
 
This is the Venturi, which is attached, this part is Venturi and this is attached and this 
fertilizer solution is sucked by using the Venturi, and then it is entering into the 
system. So this is a simple device and as such, it is an inexpensive method of fertilizer 
application. 
 
And when you look at the diagram just for few minutes, you will see the 
concentration is increasing and then it goes to almost a constant means there it goes to 
a constant value of fertilizer and concentration after a certain time. 
 
Now the concept of the Bernoulli principle is explained here that considering an inlet, 
so this is the inlet part and this is kept in the same elevation means this particular 
Venturi is kept in the same elevation. So initially the equation was pressure head plus 
velocity head plus elevation head was equal to a constant. Now we are taking two 
sections. 
 
So one section is your inlet section of the Venturi and this is the throat section. So at 
this inlet section pressure head plus velocity head is equal to the pressure head plus velocity head. Now what is happening, the pressure head and say P is the pressure 
head at the inlet. P1 is the pressure head at the inlet end and V1 is the velocity head. 
 
So at this point what happened because of the constriction, the area of the flo w 
reduces, which causes an increase in the velocity of flow and there will be a condition 
when this pressure head at this point it will become sub-atmospheric. So fertilizer 
which is kept in this tank, it will start injecting into the system. So this means P1 or 
this pressure head between the two ends can be given by changing the velocity. 
 
So change in the velocity is due to constriction in the Venturi pipe causes suction due 
to change in the pressure head from P1 to P2. That is below atmospheric pressure 
thereby the suction of fertilizer solution will take place. 
 
Now we are demonstrating you here for testing a Venturi injector. This is a Venturi 
injector. Now, a Venturi injector is used to inject chemicals. This is used to inject 
chemicals. This chemical could be a nutrient which is soluble in water and that is 
being injected into the drip system. Now, a typical drip irrigation system, if you 
remember we discussed that the water is taken from the source. 
 
So in the laboratory setup, we have got a sump where water is stored and then the 
water is being pumped by using an electric motor coupled pump which comes. This 
particular component is the suction end and that is the delivery end, so water which is 
coming at what pressure? So, a pressure gauge is mounted, we can know that how 
much is pressure available. 
 
Then this part, if we are not injecting fertilizer then the water can directly go to the 
main pipeline. So here it goes to the filter and from the filter, it will go to the system. 
There is a water meter attached to this one. So how much amount of water is passing. 
Now, if we want to inject fertilizer, so a Venturi injector is connected. Now, Venturi 
injector, this is your demonstration setup. 
 
We can test that how much amount of fertilizer or chemical or nutrient can be injected 
at a given pressure. So this is one pressure gauge, this is another pressure gauge and 
with the help of these two valves pressure is regulated.  
This particular place where there is a reduction in the diameter of the pipeline causes 
the increase in the velocity of flow that will decrease the pressure, and thereby a 
suction will be created and due to a decrease in the pressure or increasing the suction, 
the Venturi will function and then it will start injecting fertilizers.  
 
Now, you can see we are regulating the pressure and when we are regulating the 
pressure we are opening the knob. So, fertilizer has started injecting into the system. 
So at a given time the volume of water, because this is a graduated cylinder, one can 
know that in a given time, how much volume of fertilizer has been injected into the 
system. So for a given pressure, this is a pressure reading, and then what is the rate of 
injection that can be calculated. 
 
This is a simple device. There is no moving part, easy to install and maintain, suitable 
for a very low injection rate. The injection can be controlled with a metering valve 
and this is suitable for both proportional and quantitative fertilization. Means 
proportional I mean to say that water and fertilizer resource, proportionality it can be 
maintained as well as the desired amount of the fertilizer it can be given with this 
method. 
 
The disadvantage of this system, there is a considerable head loss due to constriction 
and attachment which causes. Sometimes it requires a booster pump to create an 
adequate head to supply fertilizer along with irrigation water. Quantitative fertigation 
is difficult. Moreover, automation is also difficult when we want to give fertilizer 
along with irrigation water. 
 
There is a pressurized fertilizer tank here it is named as also bypass system to supply 
fertilizer along with irrigation water. So here, what we see from the diagram, let us try 
to understand this is a tank. In this tank, the fertilizer, it could be in the liquid form or 
solid fertilizer which is soluble, the water is supplied from this end. So there is a 
flexible pipeline and at this place, there is a valve. So water from this pipeline which 
is coming from the pump it can be supplied with the help of this flexible pipeline 
which is connected with the inlet plunger pipe. 
 So inlet plunger pipeline is perforated. Water that is coming it will be getting into the 
tank. This tank is airtight. It is completely made such that the air cannot enter into the 
system and it can be opened or capped, so there is a gasket arrangement with the help 
of lid it can be tightly closed as well as, as and when it is needed it can be opened. 
 
If there is air inside so there is a bleed valve. This helps to remove the entrapped air in 
this pressurized tank. Now, when the water is being continuously flowing into the 
system what will happen, it will mix with the fertilizer available in this particular 
pressurized tank and then there is an inlet end where there is a strainer filter or a 
strainer screen which is of some certain mesh. It is kept in this particular place so that 
the dissolved fertilizer which is in the soluble form it can get into the system, that is 
your irrigation system. So it is allowed to go as long as we keep on allowing the water 
to get into the system. So this is your inlet kind of thing. And this is the outlet end of 
the thing that will be allowing the fertilizer solution to get into the pipeline system. 
 
So this is a pressurized fertilizer tank and then there is an inlet and outlet end. Now 
another important part is the pressure-reducing valve. So pressure reducing valve is 
operated in such a way that it will allow the pressure to reduce so that the pressure 
inside the tank is more than the pressure here in the pipeline, then only the soluble 
fertilizer this can be in the liquid form it can be supplied with the irrigation in the 
pipeline. 
 
And then it will go to the strainer filter or some other filter whatever it is there it goes 
to the pipeline. So here it is given the rate of flow of solution is determined by the 
pressure difference between the inlet and outlet point and is monitored by a flow 
meter. So flow meter is another device which is used to monitor how much amount of 
the fertilizer and how much amount of the water is entering into the system. 
 
The difference in the pressure between the connection and constriction in the pipeline 
is sufficient to cause the flow of water through the tank under pressure. This is the 
thing which I explained here which I told you the gradient of 0.1 to 0.2 bar is required 
to redirect an adequate stream of water through connecting tube of 9 to 12 mm 
diameter. 
 There is a sealed air-tight pressure supply tank is required to withstand maximum 
operating pressure. So this is the part which I was telling. This is an air-tight system 
and then the tank should withstand the pressure which the water it is entering and the 
water which is going through the pipeline. So it would be more than the pressure 
inside the tank. So the tank should withstand that pressure. 
 
And then the precise control valves are necessary to maintain a preset injection rate. 
So the amount of water which is entering into the pipe into the tank, the amount of 
fertilizer which is coming out of this thing, so that is the rate of injection it can be 
maintained. Fertigation is cheap and simple. A wide dilution ratio can be attained with 
no external source of energy. 
 
You can see here this is the arrangement which is shown in the field. There is one end 
the water is getting into the system, and then it is coming out, and then there is a filter. 
After it passes the filter then it goes to the pipeline. So this is the arrangement where 
this is a pressurized tank which is kept on a concrete platform and then the fertilizer is 
kept into this system and then the flow of water is maintained such that the fertilizer, 
it can be injected. 
 
What happened there is a continuous supply of water in the tank. So there is a 
dilution. So concentration initially it reaches to there will be dilution when we are 
injecting water into the system. So it reaches the concentration, but slowly it starts 
dissolving and then concentration with time it decreases. So it is unlike in the case of 
Venturi injector. 
 
Here in this case, which we are seeing here, this is a vertical model. So here, there is 
water. The water is filled into the system and then inside this flexible bag, the 
fertilizer solution is kept and when we are supplying water into the system it is 
pressing so depending on the pressure the amount of fertilizer will be coming out of 
the system and that will inject into the pipeline. 
 
So this is one model and this is the common normal model where the water is coming 
and it is getting into the system and then it goes. That is what I explained to you in the previous case. So there is the proportional model which is generally a vertical tank 
with the sizes varies from 10 to 300 liters. 
 
That will depend upon the capacity or amount of fertilizer one has to inject into the 
system. If it is a smaller system one should keep on refilling the solid fertilizers which 
are soluble in the water. The quantitative models could be of 5, 30, 60, 90 120 liter 
capacity and then this can be made horizontal or vertical tanks that can be used. The 
nutrient cannot be precisely regulated to each application. 
 
This is what I told you that we cannot maintain the correct concentration. So there is 
all the time dilution takes place. Valve throttling generates pressure losses and the 
system is not straightforward. It cannot be coupled with the automated irrigation 
system, only thing is that this is a simple system and there is low cost. No external 
power is needed and is relative ly insensitive to the changes in pressure or flow rate. 
However, the tank must be strong enough to withstand the pressure of the irrigation 
line.  
 
There are limitations. These limitations are there is a varying concentration of 
nutrients that causes the bulk of fertilizer to be applied at the beginning of the 
irrigation cycle. So initially it is getting more concentrated fertilizer and then it diluted 
to the tank must be refilled with a solution for each irrigation cycle. The system is not 
suitable to connect with automatic or serial irrigation systems. 
 
There is an injection system means that it involves the pumps and then the pump is 
used to inject fertilizer solution into the irrigation system. This is relatively more 
sensitive to concentration. One can maintain the concentration in the system. So the 
solution is means fertilizer solution is pumped from unpressurized reservoir. So this is 
the reservoir where the fertilizer solution is filled and then it will depend upon the 
type of pump we are using. So that is making the difference. So it is dependent on the 
power source.  
 
This particular pump which we are using to inject the system, it could be by using the 
combustion engine or it can be electric motor driven or the PTO of the tractor that can 
be used or hydraulic pressure or water engine.  
So this here hydraulic pressure type of system is being used. So what we are seeing 
here, when the fertilizer is to be injected so there is the piston. There is reciprocating 
motion it takes place. So when we are seeing this is the position of the piston. Now, 
this piston, what will happen, when the flow of water it is taking place, this flow of 
water, it will push the piston, it will go back. So this will cause the closing of the 
valve and then at a certain position the fertilizer is being sucked.  
 
So when the fertilizer is being sucked it will come then the fertilizer will inject here. 
The piston will come down and then it will make the fertilizer to move up, this 
particular piston to move up and then it will close. So continuous kind of a flow it will 
be once it is coming down. So this will push whatever fertilizer it has injected it will 
push and then this liquid fertilizer it will be pushed into the system. So there is a 
system where water, as well as fertilizer, dissolves with the system. Both are 
introduced and these are maintained in a proper proportion. So this is a fertilizer 
proportional system where the reciprocating type of system where double-acting 
pistons are used to make it. 
 
So pumping rate and concentration of the stock solution can be adjusted to attain the 
desired level of fertilizer application. This could be operated by an electric engine or 
pulse generating water meter so that the fertilizer injected is exactly proportional to 
the water flow and constant concentration is maintained. Automatic computerized 
control system are also available to provide the exact rate of injection into the water 
flow. 
 
And what we see here, after a certain time, when we are introducing water, initially, 
the water is getting into the tank and then it is reaching and then there is a constant 
rate of concentration is maintained. So this is the advantage of using the pumps to 
inject fertilizer along with irrigation water. 
 
There are advantages. There is flexibility and one can maintain a high discharge rate 
and then the system does not add to the head loss in the prescribed system, this is 
irrigation. This is the advantage. It maintains a constant concentration of nutrients 
throughout the period of fertilizer application.  
And this is desired in many cases particularly in the hydroponics system where the 
concentration of certain nutrients which are needed, which should be at a constant 
rate. So there actually this kind of a system is desired. The limitation or 
disadvantages, we can say it involves the cost unlike the Venturi system or the 
pressurized tank kind of a thing. It is having an operational cost because the cost of 
electricity and maintenance is required. 
 
Now, let us compare the different methods of fertigation which I discussed. I 
discussed about the bypass tank or bypass pressurized tank. We discussed about the 
Venturi injector. Just now, I told about the fertilizer pumps, injecting pumps. And 
then these are the parameters which we are interested to compare these things. 
 
So taking the parameter, at an ease of operation, bypass system, it is highly easily it 
can be operated. Venturi system, one should take care that whether there is enough 
pressure difference is created. Then only the Venturi will be sucking the fertilizer. So 
this is one thing and then from the operational point of view, it is low, there could be a 
situation where there it is easily operated. 
 
And then use of solid fertilizer. Yes, one can use the solid fertilizer and then because 
water is entering all the time so that it gets dissolved in time. But in Venturi as well as 
fertilizer pump one cannot use it. One can use liquid fertilizer, in all cases. The 
discharge rate is high in case of bypass arraignment. In the case of fertilizer pumps, it 
requires a high discharge rate. In Venturi injector, it is relatively low. 
 
Concentration control, we cannot have any concentration control in the Bypass tank . 
It is initially high and then it starts dilution because we keep on adding water. It is a 
medium for venturi and it is good for pump. Volume control is good, medium, and it 
is good for these. Head loss, there is low head loss, and then there is a very high head 
loss takes place from the system, and there is no head loss as the pump is being used.  
 
Automation, one cannot use the Bypass system for automation. This venturi can be to 
a certain extent, but here also it is medium. But the pump is highly suitable, In most 
cases, the injection pumps are used means coupled with an automated irrigation system.   Price is low, medium, and high. So price is relatively high in the case of the 
fertilizer injection pumps. 
 
Now, when we are talking about fertigation system design, one needs to know what 
should be the fertilizer requirement, how to get the value of fertilizer requirement. So 
fertilizer requirement can be estimated by using this expression where we can get the 
recommended use of fertilizer minus the available fertilizer multiplied by the fertilizer 
concentration based on what is the concentration it is needed. 
 
So for each and every crop what is the available fertilizer concentration? Accordingly, 
this correction factor is multiplied and accordingly, the fertilizer requirement can be 
estimated. 
 
Where 
Fn  = nutrient requirement (kg ha-1) 
R  = recommended dose of fertilizer for the crop (kg ha-1) 
An = available fertilizer in the soil (kg ha-1) 
Fcf = fertilizer correction factor 
 
When we want to estimate the fertilizer in each setting, how much is the fertilizer. So 
the amount of fertilizer for each setting or per setting in kilogram, it can be estimated 
by using this expression which involves the distance between the emission devices 
multiplied by the distance between the laterals multiplied by the number of emission 
devices and then a recommended dose of fertilizer in kg per hectare. 
 
Where 
Df    = amount of fertilizer per setting (kg) 
DS   = distance between emission devices (m) 
De     = distance between laterals (m) 
Ns   = number of emission devices  
Wf    = recommended fertilizer dose (kg ha-1)  
 
So this is practically we will be divided by 10,000 it will depend upon the unit we are 
using. So if you are using in kilogram per hectare, then it is coming in that is to be 
divided by 10,000 because hectare is being used as a unit. 
 
Now, how to prepare the stock solution. So stock solution means we need to know 
what is the concentration of a particular fertilizer, nitrogenous fertilizer. So let us say 
that we want to give 20 kg of nitrogen in a particular place. So assuming that 20 kg of 
nitrogen is to be used for fertigation. So the amount of urea available is 46%. So for 
20 kg nitrogen, the amount required will be 43.5 kg of urea will be adding.  
 
And then we will see what is the solubility of urea. So 1100 gram per liter. So we 
need to use 40 liters of water to apply the 43.5 kg of urea. And about 50 liter capacity 
container is enough to store 40 liters of water which will be dissolving the 20 kg urea 
of means 20 kg of nitrogen which can be given. So we will be using the siphon, the 
clear solution, and injecting it through the fertigation applicator. 
 
Now, another point is the frequency of fertigation. So what is the frequency of 
fertigation means we want to give whether it is once in a day or once in every two 
days or once in a week. So the frequency depends upon the type of system design, 
irrigation scheduling, soil type, nutrient requirement of the crop, and farmer ’s 
preference. So injection duration in fertigation, what should the duration. 
 
So normally, the maximum duration of 40 to 60 minutes is recommended with enough 
time for flushing and fertilizer residues from the lines before setting up the pump. 
And the maximum injection duration depends on which type of soil, what is nutrient 
which we are giving, and what is the water requirement of the crop. So injection 
duration is sufficient for uniform distribution of nutrients throughout the fertigation 
zone. 
 
Fertilizer concentration can be computed by using this expression. So this is given by 
 
Where 
Cf    = concentration of nutrients in irrigation water (ppm) 
Tr   = ratio between fertilization time and irrigation time 
Id    = gross irrigation depth  (mm) 
Fr   = rate of fertilizing irrigation cycle (kg ha-1) 
 
So if we are using the fertilizer concentration in ppm and then if we are giving the rate 
of fertilizer, irrigation cycle in kilogram per hectare and then the ratio of fertilization 
time to irrigation time is maintained that is given by a time ratio and then the grass 
irrigation depth is in millimeter. So once we will calculate the se numerical problems 
you will get experience how to find out the fertilizer concentration. 
 
And then one can also find out the fertilizer injection rate. So fertilizer injection rate 
qfi can be computed by using the expression  
 
Where, 
qfi = injection rate of liquid fertilizer solution into the system (Lh-1) 
Fr = rate of fertilizing (quantity of nutrient to be applied) per irrigation cycle (kg ha-1) 
A = area irrigated (ha) in time (I t) 
c = concentration of nutrient in liquid fertilizer (kg L-1) 
tr = ratio between fertilization time and irrigation time 
It = duration of irrigation (h) 
 
So using this expression and these units one can find out the rate of injecting liquid 
fertilizer into the drip irrigation system in liter per hour. And then one can find out 
what is the fertilizer tank capacity. So fertilizer tank capacity if I want to calculate in 
liters  
 
Where Fr is the rate of fertilizer per irrigation cycle that is in kg per hectare, A is the 
area irrigated in time t, c is the concentration of nutrient in kilogram per liter. So if 
you use these units one can get the capacity of the fertilizer tank in liter. So having got 
these data one can find out the parameter which are required to design the fertigation 
unit's fertigation components. 
 
So refer to these books which are given here. These books can be used as a textbook 
and then also you can refer to some of the notes which are available on the internet. 
So in this particular lecture, we discussed about the theoretical aspect of the fertilizer 
application method. We discussed about the design of the fertigation system where 
the different expressions have been used. And then in the forthcoming lecture, we will 
discuss about irrigation filters. So this is the concluding part of this lecture. And thank 
you very much. 