Micro Irrigation Engineering 
Prof. Kamlesh Narayan Tiwari 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology – Kharagpur 
 
Lecture – 22 
Micro Irrigation 
 
Hello participants, now, we are entering lecture 22 of micro irrigation engineering subject. In 
lecture 22, we will be dealing with micro irrigation and this is just what we are entering in the 
subject title micro irrigation engineering. So far, we discussed basic fundamentals of the 
subject, related to micro irrigation engineering where we discussed about flow through pipes 
means using principles of fluid mechanics. We discussed about the soil-plant-water 
relationship. We discussed about different soil water potentials. We discussed about irrigation 
scheduling and then surface irrigation methods. So, let us get into the topic of today 's lecture, 
which is on micro irrigation engineering. 
 
So, here we will deal with what are the benefits? What are the importance of micro irrigation 
engineering? When it was introduced historical background? And in micro irrigation, what 
are the different system components that are used? And what are the different types of micro 
irrigation?  
 
Now, when we say micro irrigation, it is one of the types of pressurized irrigation. A 
pressurized irrigation system is a system consisting of a network of pipes, their fittings, and 
other devices through which water is supplied by using external pressure. The water is 
brought from the source to irrigate the area. Now, the basic difference between conventional 
surface irrigation and piped irrigation techniques, here, let us try to learn from the water flow 
regime; how the water is moving.  
 
So, when we say water flow regime, how does the water takes place. It means here water is 
applied in the network of the pipeline where the pressure is created whereas, in surface 
irrigation, it is overland flow. The overland flow means, it is the inertial force, gravitational 
force, and then water which is released from the reservoir, in a canal, it comes from certain 
pressures so the gradient is causing the water flow to take place.  
 Root direction of the flow, the root direction of the flow in the traditional method, is simply a 
slope that guides the water to flow. In pipe flow, it will depend upon how much pressure it is 
being created. Irrespective of pressure, irrespective of the direction of the flow or direction of 
the slope, the water will move into the pipe that how much pressure it is being created in the 
pipeline.  
 
And then area irrigated, area irrigated in the pipe flow if there are several openings in the 
pipeline, so, the whole area can be irrigated simultaneously in case of pipe irrigation whereas, 
in the surface irrigation system, the whole area at a time it cannot be irrigated. So, this is the 
difference. This point is where I am talking about the external energy required in the case of 
pipe irrigation. It is correct. We need to provide adequate pressure in the pipeline, so, as to 
deliver water at each and every point of the field, whether it is a very highly elevated point in  
the field or it is in a very low elevated point. When we talk of the pressurized irrigation 
system so, this pressure which is being created by using a pump, so, it can be put up that how 
much pressure it is being created with the help of the pump.  
 
So, is it a low-pressure system or we are putting it using a simply overhead tank? So, it is a 
low-pressure system. So, low pressure is categorized by using means up to the pressure of 3.5 
bars. When we say pressure, it ranges between 3.5 to 5 bar, it is a medium pressure system 
and when the pressure requirement or pressure created is more than 5 bar, it is a high-
pressure system.  
 
So, when we talk of micro irrigation system, micro irrigation system, it uses low pressure. 
Medium pressure is a sprinkler irrigation system. And when the pressure requirement goes 
very high that is more than 5, we can use a rain gun, we can use centrally pivot irrigation 
system. So, it depends that how much pressure is needed and accordingly, that particular type 
of device will be used.  
 
Now, coming to the micro irrigation system. So, what are the specific characteristics of a 
micro irrigation system? Micro irrigation is a slow application of water on or above or below 
the soil surface, by using a surface drip system, by using a subsurface drip system, by using a 
bubbler, or by using a micro sprinkler. So, there are different modes of water application, but 
relatively the flow rate is small.  
 In a micro irrigation system, this is another characteristics means, it will depend upon what 
type of device we are using. So, water can be applied in discrete or continuous drops. It can 
be tiny streams or it can be miniature spray through foggers or micro sprinklers which are 
placed along the water delivery line which we say lateral pipeline which is adjacent to the 
plant row.  
 
A micro irrigation system is also called localized irrigation. Localized irrigation means, it is 
to emphasize that only part of the soil volume is wetted. Now, the entire field is flooded  as in 
the case of surface irrigation or we just discussed in surface irrigation topic. So, in some 
literature, this is also called a trickle irrigation system. So, micro irrigation has got different 
terminologies and in different organizations like the American Society of Agricultural and 
Biological Engineers, they use a term called micro irrigation. In India, we are using the term, 
also by Government of India, they also say micro irrigation system means the quite a good 
number of emission devices, it had been brought under micro irrigation. So, there are 
different implementing agencies in different parts of the world. They are using different 
terminologies.  
 
Now, as far as the historical development of micro irrigation is concern ed, it is started as 
early as 1860. In Germany, they used the subsurface irrigation system for irrigating crops. In 
the USA, this micro irrigation means they give terminology as drip irrigation as early as 
1913. Again in 1920, Germany used the perforated pipe to irrigate the crop.  
 
It was Simcha Blass in Israel in 1940, he saw, there is a leaking pipe tap and the plant getting 
water from this leaking tap, it had vigorous growth, that tree had a vigorous growth as 
compared to other trees in the vicinity. So, then he thought if instead of irrigating the crop 
continuously by extreme flow and flooding the field if we apply water drop by drop and he 
started working on this and then he applied and founded results are encouraging.  
 
And the concept of giving water drop by drop and then bringing a commercial aspect of drip 
irrigation system came from Israel in 1960. Now, Israel is the leading country who 
commercializ ed. In India, we had been doing giving water to the tulsi plant or there are 
various plants by using earthen peaches. These are our ancient history and historical 
development it says, but we did not take up these work in a commercial way.  
 So, it is Israel where they had a severe problem of the water crisis and then the large part of 
their desert land, they converted to the green valley because of using the drip system. So, in 
India, this is started, indigenous perforated earthen pipe, perforated bamboo pitcher in the 
northeastern region and pitcher and porous crops, they started but these were all in a very 
primitive way, these things were being used.  
 
It started from the research point of view, in research institutions and agricultural universities, 
they started in 1970. At IIT Kharagpur, we also were started doing this work in the early 80s. 
We started doing our research work in the early 80s. Later on, the Government of India 
formed a precision farming Development Centre which we were 22 in numbers which w as 
formed by a national committee of plasticulture application in horticulture that is NCPAH 
means gave 22 projects in different agro-climatic regions of the country. They did a lot of 
research work and we also came out our research finding where a large number of farmers, 
are using a micro irrigation system to the research work carried out in PFDCs.  
 
Now, what are the different micro irrigation characteristics? So, micro irrigation is usually 
characterized by these features. What is that? Water application is at a slow rate. It is  
operated for a longer water application time means the duration of water application is large. 
Then, water is applied at frequent intervals. In a surface irrigation system when we apply 
water, the irrigation interval could be 2 weeks, more than 2 weeks.  
 
Whereas in the micro irrigation system, this can be done daily or on an alternate day, not 
more than 2 days irrigation interval. So, the plant root system there means it gets optimum 
soil moisture conditions. So, better healthy growth of the plant takes place. Water is applied 
at the root zone means there is nothing like any flooding of water exactly at the root zone 
water is being applied.  
 
And it is a low-pressure water delivery system and then water is routinely used to transpor t 
fertilizer and other chemicals. Means here fertiliz ers and other agricultural chemicals they 
can be applied along with the irrigation water which we call fertigation or chemigation. So, 
chemicals or fertilizers, desired fertilizers, it can be given. Now, you can see here  the water is 
applied in a tiny and here the water is applied in a spray form.  
 Now, what are the principal crops which are suitable for micro irrigation system, which are 
giving higher economic returns? So, almost all the crops are suitable under micro irrigation 
system, but because of its initial investment, some of the crops which are giving higher return 
in a short er period like the fruits, vegetable, ornamental plant, flowers, the spices, this has 
been found suitable.  
 
Now, you can see here, these are the fruit crops where the micro irrigation system ha s been 
found highly successful. And then here, we see these flower crops which are being grown; 
tomato, these are vegetable crops, tomato or variety of crops which are shown here. So, a ll 
these crops are suitable. Micro irrigation is also applied to landscaping, greenhouses, and 
nursery.  
 
Our researches in cereal crops like paddy have also proved that micro irrigation means it 
requires about 40% saving in water and the yields are at p ar or more than the conventional 
irrigation system for irrigating paddy crops. So, like this you know, wheat, rice, and these 
crops where people were not doing now, these researchers say and then some of the farmers, 
they have also started using micro irrigation for these crops.  
 
There are some advantages. Why micro irrigation should be implemented? Because it has 
increased water use efficiency. So, significant improvements in yield have been documented 
with micro irrigation systems. So, water use efficiency means yield per unit quantity of water 
used that has been and means it is giving higher result, improved the crop yields and quality. 
Results mean here, the result due to reduced plant water stress due to slow and frequent water 
application.  
 
What happened in the case of a surface irrigation system? The plant has to undergo water 
stress due to the drying phase means there are few days where the rooting system of the plant 
it goes through the drying phase. And then few days which means when the field is flooded 
with the water so, there is a waterlogging condition so, the soil aeration is poor. So, that 
affects the plant, crop yield, and quality of produce.  
 
Reduced non-beneficial use means, here irrigation of smaller soil volume eliminated runoff 
and controlled deep percolation losses. So, non-beneficial use of the water is eliminated. To a 
certain extent, we can use saline water means we cannot use as such saline but a certain leve l of concentration means the diluted water that can be used by using the saline water which is 
not possible in the case of a surface irrigation system.  
 
So, what happened? The soil water gets more diluted by maintaining stable soil water 
conditions when we apply drop by drop by the drip irrigation system. And then the salts get 
pushed beyond the active plant root zone area because it is maintaining the stable soil water 
condition. So, the concentration of the salt is pushed out of the effective root zone area.  
 
There are some other advantages. It has got better fertilizer use efficiency. That is the other 
advantage means a fertilizer, it remains within the root zone depth. So, water, as well as 
fertilizer used by the plant system is consumed more. Fertilizer use efficiency is better. There 
is a decrease in energy requirement because it is a low power system, a low energy system. 
So, the energy requirement is less. 
 
Improved cultural practices, it does not interrupt the cultural operation so, weed infestation, 
there is a less growth of the weed it takes place. So, that is another advantage and then to a 
certain extent, one can use the treated wastewater. Now, when we have got a shortage of 
water supply for irrigation purposes so, treating wastewater and bringing it for irrigation. 
Micro irrigation can be used as a lot of researchers are being advocated to go for using 
wastewater using a micro irrigation system.  
 
There are some limitations or disadvantages of a micro irrigation system. It requires extensive 
maintenance. So, partial clogging of emitters, leakage in the pipe system, and root intrusion 
take place. There is a salt accumulation near the plants that is another problem. What 
happened? When we are giving the saline water so, it needs to be applied regularly if we are 
not applying regularly, breaking the system and giving surface water or there is rainfall. So, 
that bulb that is maintaining that bulb will break, and then it will come to the soil surface. 
This is the disadvantage and another thing is that when we are applying saltwater, it is likely 
that the salt will be deposited at the surface volume.  
 
Restricted route development, when water is being applied on the surface so, root 
development means it becomes shallow root systems. So, during wind conditions, cyclone 
condition, plants get uprooted that is the limitation of this system. Therefore, the subsurface 
drip system is being advocated in order to take care of the development of the root system. High system cost, no doubt it requires several components which are expensive, but this 
system cost is partially supported by the Government of India and the state governments. So, 
this is being restricted. 
 
There is a restricted crop rotation. This limitation usually applies to subsurface drip irrigation 
systems. So, when the system is adopted, a subsurface drip system is adopted that remains in 
the soil. So, one can use only certain crops which have the same type of routing pattern, the 
same depth of routing pattern accordingly, that can be adopted.  
 
In the micro irrigation system, one needs to take care of certain systems which should be 
considered while designing. So, we will discuss this part in detail when we will come to that 
design part, it has got systematic design and installation. It requires maintenance 
consideration. Yes, it requests maintenance in order to get higher life of the micro irriga tion 
system. It requires certain management, anything when we purchase so, maintenance and 
management is an important component and that should be taken care of in order to get a 
good response for the system. And then economics, so, an economic part that when we are 
considering the crop, we need to take care whether this crop is profitable in terms of the 
yield, in terms of water saving, in terms of early produce, the time of production, all these 
things are required to be considered while we are deciding.  
 
Now, let us come to the different components of a micro irrigation system. This is very 
important in any micro irrigation system, water is being taken from the source. So, here this 
is a pump, pumping can be water, which is being pumped, it is brought to the pipeline. So, it 
requires filtration and so, it goes to the filter system.  
 
So, after it goes to the filter system, then it comes here in the main pipeline and then 
subsurface pipeline, then the lateral pipeline, and then on the lateral, there are emitters. So, 
we can say if I am just putting it, we can say the entire micro irrigation s ystem, it can be 
divided into a distribution system. A distribution system practically it receives water after it 
passing through the head control or control system.  
 
So, when we say that the distribution system means here, I am telling you that main pipeline, 
branch pipeline, subma in pipeline. That is your main pipeline, then you are seeing that is the 
submain pipeline. This is your main pipeline, from it goes to submain, then submain manifold on the submain manifold there are laterals and on the laterals, these emitters or the emission 
device.  
 
So, this entire system, we can put it at the emission devices and then control and automation 
is another part that is your valves and sensors that can be controlled. We will discuss these 
things in detail when we will come to these topics and then filtration and fertigation are 
another part. Then the other part is your power supply that which is the type of pump which 
we will be using and then from where the system means water will be pumped to the system.  
 
Now, there are different types of micro irrigation system. So, let us come to the surface 
system. The surface drip system uses emitters and laterals that are laid above the ground 
level. So, you are seeing that this is your submain pipeline and then laterals are attached with 
the submain pipeline. And then lateral is laid above the land surface and then drippers are 
attached at an appropriate location in the surface drip system.  
 
So, generally, in a surface drip system, the emitters which are used for delivering discharge 
that should match with the infiltration capacity of the soil. So, normally these drippers are 1 
litre per hour, 2 litre per hour, 4 litre per hour, 6 litre per hour, 8 litre per hour, this should not 
deliver water that will form runoff. So, the 12 litre per hour is the maximum capacity. It 
should be always less than 12 litre per hour.  
 
Subsurface as the name says that the pipeline as well as the dripper, are buried below the 
ground level and these are put up at appropriate depth. So, that the plants receive water 
exactly at the root zone depth of the plant. Here, the evaporation loss is controlled. So, the 
evaporation is controlled and then the total life of the system is also large. And this is also 
possible to provide irrigation as well as fertilizer whether it is a surface system or subsurface 
drip system, both can be operated and then it has got longer operational life.  
 
Bubbler as you see here, the water supply is being given here, when the quality of water is 
poor, And when the amount of water is not a limitation, then, in that case, bubbler can be 
used. When the quality of water is poor means, the drippers are getting clogged, then this 
bubbler can be used. So, water is applied to the soil surface in a small stream or fountain.  
 It looks like a fountain opening with the point source, the discharge rate is greater than the 12 
litre per hour which is used in a surface or subsurface drip. Usually, their discharge goes up 
to 250 litres per hour. These are used extensively for irrigating the crops which are say a 
perennial crop, fruit crops say or orchard crop or they can be also used for landscape. So, for  
that purpose, the bubblers are used. 
 
Micro sprinklers for close -growing crops and when the quality of water, I am telling you, 
poor in the sense means a lot of sediments or silt is flowing with the water. So, the orifice 
size is large, in that case, micro sprinkler and particularly for irrigating close -growing crops 
like spinach, the crops like fenugreek, dhania such type of crop, it can be irrigated.  
 
So, the air is instrumental in distributing the water. Such micro-sprinklers have got a higher 
discharge, normally their discharge is less than 175 litre per hour. Of course, it is vulnerable 
to high wind, because wind drifts the water distribution pattern and also evaporation can take 
place.  
 
So, those were the devices that I discussed about the different types of micro irrigation 
systems. These are the references, you can refer to the references which are useful for this 
topic.  
 
So, let us summarise this particular lecture which I have taken on micro irrigation. So, we 
discussed about the importance of a micro irrigation system. The historical development of 
micro irrigation system, what are the characteristics and the principal crops which are suitable 
for the micro irrigation system. Then what are the different types of this MI system, design 
consideration, what are the different system components and the types of a micro irrigation 
system.  
 
In the forthcoming lecture, we will be discussing about drip irrigation system and what are 
the different types of drip system drippers. We will discuss this in detail in the forthcoming 
lecture. Thank you very much. Good day.  
 