Micro Irrigation Engineering 
Prof. Kamlesh Narayan Tiwari 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology – Kharagpur 
 
Lecture - 32 
Installation and Operation of Drip Irrigation System 
 
Hello, participants of Micro Irrigation Engineering subject. I invite you to Lecture 32. 
Lecture 32 deals with installation and operation of drip irrigation system. In previous 
lectures, we dealt about micro irrigation components. We dealt with filtration system. We 
dealt with fertigation system. We worked out some problems on this. Now, after the design of 
the micro irrigation system it is done we need to install and operate drip irrigation system so 
that it works effectively. We can achieve maximum benefit out of the system which has been 
installed in the field.  
 
So, we will be dealing in this lecture about installation of surface drip irrigation system. We 
will also deal with how to operate different components which are joined with drip irrigation.  
 
So, in this topic when we say installation of drip irrigation system means we need to insta ll 
all the components, which are there in the head control unit. Now, head control unit, it consist 
of installation of the pumping set. It consists of several valves which are there in the system, 
installation of water monitoring device that is water meter, filters, fertilizer equipment, and 
flow control units. We deal with the installation of connecting with the mains, sub-main, 
laying of the drip tape, laterals, and also connecting drip emitters.  
 
So, when we talk of head control unit, first important point in the head control unit is 
installation of the pumping system or overhead tank. But overhead tank has limited capacity 
or we need to lift water at adequate height for filling the tank, also we need to have a pump. 
So, commonly used pump is centrifugal pump. So, we need to install a centrifugal pump.  
 
For any system which we talk of, it is the, what should be the suitable size of the pump. And 
once we have designed the size of the pump means we have found out the horsepower 
requirement to the pump then it should be properly installed at the suitable foundation and 
correct location. Now, type of installation, it will depend upon the type of water source. 
These water sources can be surface water or groundwater.   
If it is groundwater, then it will also again whether water is being taken from an open well 
which is at shallow depth or it could be from a tube well which is at deeper depth. So, the 
depth of water is important, and accordingly the selection and installation of the system it can 
be made. Then it comes that what is the type of prime mover which we are using. So, prime 
mover as I told you it could be an electric motor or diesel engine to operate the pump.  
 
Normally a centrifugal pump operate when the suction lift is limited to 5 to 6 meter. And it is 
further reduced if the length of the pipe of the suction pipe is increased.  
 
So, foot valve is another component. It is installed at the suction side of the pipeline and then 
without which the movement of the pump water it is stopped or slowed down. So, all the 
water in the pipeline will run back through the pump making it impossible to restart pump 
unless pipeline is first refilled with the water. So, this is an important component of the 
centrifugal pump.  
 
The next part, it comes is what is the suction limit? So, suction limit as I told you that it 
should be within 5 to 6 meter. To take care of the suction limit, we need I mean there should 
be proper flexibility that we can increase the delivery head and reduce the suction lid by 
lowering the pump at appropriate depth from the land surface.  
 
If the delivery pipeline is long, it is also important to have another check valve or non-return 
valve at the pump outlet. So, this will take care of the particular whole pipeline it is filled 
with the water. And it is necessary because suddenly if the pump stops, flow will continue 
until the pressure drop enough to cause cavitation in the pipeline. And when upward 
movement is exhausted, the flow reverses, and cavitation bubbles implode creating severe 
water hammer.  
 
So, other installations of the centrifugal pumps could be below the ground surface called 
sump installation. So, it can be above the ground level or it can be below the ground level.  
 
So, you can see here when the pump is installed at the ground level and water is taken from a 
pond or from a river and it is lifted, it is lifted to some hilly part of the region and then water 
is supplied at that particular place. So, this could be another situation where the suction installation of the centrifugal is done. Now, when we talk of the water level quite deep then 
the pump is kept near the water surface.  
 
So, it is kept near the water surface that we call it as a sump installation and the motor is on 
the ground level. So, delivery head increases, in that case, means total head when we are 
talking static discharge head will be calculated based on, so, in order to get effective the total 
head, we need to lower the pump and then install in case of sump installation.  
 
So, when we are installing filters, so, for installation of filters, a hard base made of concrete 
is constructed for installation of filters and other head control units according to size. One 
should take care that there should be minimum use of accessories such as elbow, reducers so 
as to minimize head loss. So, this is important part that as far as possible minimum 
connectors should be made in the pipeline.  
 
It could be from the pump nipple means from the pump side that from the pump. And when 
we are coming to the main pipeline, sub-main pipeline, lateral pipeline so, in these units as 
far as possible there should be minimum connection so that head does not reduce much.  
 
Filter size should be in accordance with the capacity of the system. The capacity of the 
system means our pumping system and the filter candle, it should match each other so that 
there should be proper matching with these units. The other point is that the delivery pipe of 
the pumps should be connected directly to the hydrocylcone or media filter or sand filter. So, 
hydrocylcone filter or the media filter, it should be connected with the pump, or that could be 
followed by the fertigation unit and then screen filter then connected with the main pipeline.  
 
So, this means your layout of system one should make so that there is a minimum head loss 
takes place and effectiveness of the entire system, it can work efficiently. Now, once the sand 
or screen filters are installed in the correct position or in a proper means correct alignment, 
the arrangement for backwashing of filter is one of the essential requirement.  
 
You can see here, this is the media filter in which the sand, the coarse gravel then medium-
sized gravel, coarse sand, and then medium sand it is filled. This is a vertical media filter 
which we have installed in our farm to connect with the micro irrigation system. And this system is being used for irrigating vegetables as well as other crops. Now, the water is 
brought from you can see here the water is brought from the pump.  
 
Then this is the inlet end of the pump, water is brought from the inlet end means from the 
pump to this unit. And then, this water will pass from the filter media, and then it will go to 
the main pipeline. It is connected with the main pipeline. Now, when we find that the head 
loss in the filter, it is more than the prescribed limit that is 70 kilopascal, then the water is 
supplied from this end.  
 
And then, this valve is closed. This valve is made open and then water will come out from 
this and then backwashing is done. So, this is the arrangement what we are seeing here. The 
water is brought from this end. So, this is the part which is coming from this end. So, this is 
the supply end. Then it comes to another filter. This is a screen filter and then it is connected 
to the main pipeline.  
 
So, before it goes to the main pipeline, a water meter is connected. And we are able to 
monitor how much amount of water it is passing through. So, one can know that what is the 
volume of water. At the same time, one can know, what is the rate of flow in a given time? It 
can be calculated. So, then it goes to the main pipeline. And from main pipeline, sub-main 
and other units they are connected.  
 
Then, we come to the fertigation equipment installation. In the pressurized irrigation system, 
the fertilizer injection unit is located between the sand filter and screen filter. Of course, it 
will depend upon the field location and then the quality of the water. The general 
recommendation is that fertilizer solution should pass through at least two 90-degree turns to 
ensure adequate time for thorough mixing it can take place so as to remove the precipitate 
with the help of a screen filter.  
 
And, it is a must that a fertigation unit is installed at the upstream end of the screen filter so 
as to filter the undissolved matter present in the fertilizer solution. So, if at all there is some 
chemical reaction it has taken place, so, this should be taken care. And then it should be 
screened out by using the screen filter.  
 Here is what you see that the water distribution network. What we see is that there is an 
installation of the main pipeline and sub-main pipeline. Both the main and sub mains are 
installed below the ground level at a minimum depth of about 0.5 meter. So that they are 
unaffected by cultivation or by the movement of heavy harvesting or any other intercultur al 
operation machinery.  
 
So, they are normally kept at about 0.5 meter to 0.6 meter below the ground level. And this is 
what you see that the main pipeline has been laid below the ground level. This is also we 
have installed in our farm for irrigating the crop. Mainly, vegetable crops and other crops are 
also being irrigated by using this particular drip irrigation system. So, lateral with online 
emission devices, these are portable. They are removed at the end of each season. Generally, 
sub-main pipeline, it runs across the direction of the plant rows.  
 
As per the recommendation of USSCS, that is United States Soil Conservation Service, they 
have recommended that what should be the depth at which such pipelines should be laid. So, 
this will depend upon the, what is size of the pipeline? Larger the pipeline size, then it should 
be laid more, means, depth of the placing the pipeline it should be more. So, this is what we 
see if it is 12 millimeter to 60 millimeter dia pipeline. Normally, it is placed 45 centimeter 
below the land surface. And then if the pipe size is of 60 to 100 millimeter size, then it is 
placed about 2 feet below the ground level. And when it is greater than 600 millimeter 
diameter pipeline, then this is placed 75 centimeter below the ground level.  
 
So, it is important to clean mud and other impurities which are deposited in the pipeline 
before fitting of mains and sub-main as well as gate valves. A ball valve is provided at the 
inlet end of the sub-main. And after the ball valve, the air release valve is connected on the 
drip tape or sub-main pipeline so that whatever air entered in the pipeline or entrapped in the 
pipeline, that can be removed by using the air release valve. A flush valve is required at the 
end of each sub-main pipeline to facilitate sub-main flushing.  
 
We need to lay the lateral pipeline. So, once the grommet take-offs are fixed on the sub-main, 
lateral laying is done as per the design. So, for this, holes are drilled on the sub-main 
according to the grommet takeoff. So, if the size of the grommet takeoff is 8 millimeter, then 
11.9 millimeter dia drill bit is used. And then, if it is the grommet means this pipe size is 13 
millimeter, then it should be large because we need to put the grommet for connecting the lateral pipeline. So, these are some basic arrangements this is needed to properly connect the 
lateral pipeline with a sub-main pipeline.  
 
Laterals are fixed to one end of the takeoff. Lateral placement is done according to the row 
distance with sufficient shrinking allowance and extra provision is made so that the length of 
the lateral is given a little longer. The drippers are punched on the top of the lateral as per the 
crop requirements. So, the size of the dripper and then particularly what should be the 
direction of the flow? That is also important. It can be taken care depending on the type o f 
drippers.  
 
Generally, laterals are laid on the ground for surface drip system and underground in case of 
subsurface drip system. Usually, laterals are placed along contours on sloping land in case of 
a surface drip system. The downstream side of the lateral can be closed by simply folding 
back the pipe and closing it with a ring larger diameter pipe which we call ed it an end plug. 
This can be easily slipped for flushing the lateral.  
 
Here you can see how the surface drip laterals are being installed on the land surface where 
there is an arrangement and then there is a pool means where the laterals are placed. In this 
pool, as the tractor is being forwarded, this pool also drives, and then it is placed at an 
appropriate spacing. So, depending on the crop row spacing, these pools are being it is 
coming above the ground level and laterals are being placed.  
 
You see here, how the laterals are coming over the land surface when the surface drip laterals 
are being driven. That is mechanically driven for a larger area. When it is to be laid below the 
ground level that is sub-surface lateral, so, this is also done mechanically by putting, so there 
is the particular pool on which the laterals are placed, and then when the tractor is being 
driven, it is placing below the ground levels. After it is placed, so, one end of the subsurface 
lateral is connected with the sub-main pipeline. This is what you see. And this is the 
connection where it is being made. And then depending on the root zone of the crop 
accordingly the subsurface laterals have been placed.  
 
Now, punching of laterals and fixing of drip emitters. So, punching of laterals, it should start 
from sub-main end means from the upstream side of the lateral, we will start attaching drip emitters. Water should be allowed to flow through the laterals so as to get bulging effect in 
the pipe which makes it easy for punching the lateral.  
 
The dripper position is fixed as per the crop spacing means depending on the spacing of the 
crop and then number of drippers needed, it is decided. The drippers are fixed on laterals as 
per the arrows marked. And it should be towards the sub-main side means water is being 
taken in the lateral pipeline from the sub-main pipeline. So, accordingly this thing one should 
take care of when we are fixing the drippers. While fixing the dripper push it inside the lateral 
and pull it slightly. The end of laterals should be closed with an end cap.  
 
Here I am demonstrating to you how to attach lateral with sub-main pipeline. So, in 
installation, this is one of the important task. The main pipeline supplies water to the sub-
main pipeline. So, main pipeline is usually larger in size so as to supply more water. And 
pipeline could be made up of PVC or HDPE. Now, here I am showing you, this is a sub-main 
pipeline which is made up of HDPE.  
 
Now, in this pipeline, when we want to attach lateral pipeline, so, we will make a hole by 
using the drill bit. Now, this is a field operation because this pipeline will be laid below the 
ground level and in the field. Just to demonstrate you, I am showing you separately to learn 
about how the lateral pipeline is attached with the sub-main pipeline. So, in sub-main 
pipeline, we are using a drill bit. So, using this drill bit a hole is will be made.  
 
And in the hole, we will be placing, this is a gasket, we will be placing gasket. And then there 
is a GTO. GTO is practically it is a grommet takeoff. So, grommet takeoff is of different 
sizes. If I want to attach a 16 millimeter pipeline so 16 millimeter pipeline will be attached 
with the grommet takeoff. So, normally, what is to be done? The water which is coming say 
from this direction, so, the direction of the grommet take off inlet which will be in this 
direction.  
 
Means perpendicular to the direction of the flow where the water will be entering. And then a 
lateral pipeline will be attached with the grommet take off. And on the lateral pipeline, we 
will place the dripper at appropriate location. This is your dripper. And dripper will be 
attached with the help of a punch. So, you can see how the hole is being made by using a drill 
bit and then how the grommet takeoff is being inserted inside the sub-main pipeline.   
This is a hole which has been made with the help of a drill bit. Now, you can see here after 
the hole was made, a washer has been placed in the hole so that water does not leak from this 
place. Now, the grommet takeoff has been placed in the hole by attaching this particular 
washer. And then the important party if the flow is coming from this direction, so, this arrow 
is shown.  
 
So, this arrow is basically it is showing the water will be entering from this end. So, this is the 
inlet end of the pipeline where the water will be entering. And then on this, a lateral will be 
attached. So, you can see here a lateral has been attached with this sub-main pipeline. Now, 
on this lateral, means wherever the position required, we want to give water in the plant root 
zone. So, exactly at that place, hole will be made .  
 
So, this is the thing when we have attached the lateral pipeline with the sub-main pipeline and 
then the dripper has been attached with the lateral pipeline. So, one can see that after 
attaching the drip emitters, how the water it is emerging out of the drip emitter. So, the water 
which is coming out of the drip emitter, it will depend upon the pressure available in the 
pipeline and particularly pressure available at the tip of the nozzle. Means, at this particular 
place, how much is the pressure available? So, this has to be monitored from the inlet end of 
the lateral.  
 
Now, you can see here when the lateral, when these particular drippers, when we have 
attached and when we are supplying water, so, the water which is coming out from one end to 
the other end, it forms the wetting circle. This is the wetting circle it will form. So, when we 
are observing, one part is that observing the amount of water which is delivering out of the 
drip emitter. But all the drip emitters, water cannot be collected. So, only few sample places, 
this water is being collected for finding out the uniformity of water discharging out of the 
drippers. So, if we take observations, just visual observation, how the wetting circle it has 
formed. So, if it is of uniform in size, all it is, all throughout field if you see, if it is of 
uniform size, it shows that the drippers have given uniform discharge.  
 
Now, we will learn, what are the important operational part which are there in the drip 
irrigation system components? And this should be taken care. So, basically, for the proper 
operation of a drip irrigation system, one should acquire complete information from the designer. When one wants to operate the system so, a designer or dealer, he should have a 
complete record, complete information that how to operate all these components. The person 
who is operating, he should know when to irrigate means when the irrigation system should 
be put on. Then, how long the pump or drip irrigation should be operated? Means, this will 
depend upon the type of crop. This will also depend upon the number of drippers which has 
been placed to each plant.  
 
So, dripper capacity and the requirement of the water of the crop, accordingly, the time of 
irrigation one should have the full knowledge about this. Checking the water meter reading, 
recording the values, and also accurately setting the hydraulic measuring unit means, one 
should know what is the amount of water which is flowing? So, for all those metering parts , 
one should have the data.  
 
Now, operating the head valve to begin irrigation, checking the system along with all 
components for proper operation, beginning with pressure gauge reading at the head end side. 
And then finding out how much is the discharge it is giving, at least on a random basis. Such 
data should be collected. One should visit the farm at different points. And then see that 
whether all the drippers are delivering the discharge as per the recommended value.  
 
Then setting and operating the chemicals and fertilizer injection equipment accordingly as per 
the guidelines. So, this should be another point one should take care. So, having understood 
these parts, one can operate and install the system properly.  
 
Now, to learn more in detail, these are the books textbooks as well as the other reference 
book one can refer to get the full knowledge about the design, about the installation part, 
about the operating the different components.  
 
So, to summarize this particular lecture, we discussed about how to install the pump, how to 
install the filter unit, how to install the fertigation unit, and how to operate these drip 
irrigation system components. And these points, one should take care of to get the maximum 
benefit or full efficiency of the system. Now, in the forthcoming lecture, we will discuss 
about maintenance of drip irrigation system. So, thank you very much. 
 