Micro Irrigation Engineering 
Prof. Kamlesh Narayan Tiwari 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology-Kharagpur 
 
Lecture - 38 
Micro Sprinkler Irrigation System 
 
Hello, participants now we are starting lecture 38. Lecture 38 is Micro Sprinkler 
Irrigation System. In previous lectures, we discussed about water movement through 
porous media when we apply water through a drip emitter. We also discussed how to 
develop a dripper by using basic fundamentals of the Navier-Stokes theorem and then 
solving that this equation by using SolidWorks software and giving the appropriate 
design parameters and fabrication of a dripper. 
 
This particular topic which I am going to discuss here on the micro sprinkler irrigation 
system, this topic also falls under the family of micro irrigation. 
 
Now here we will discuss what is the importance of a micro sprinkler system, how 
this can be installed, how important this particular system is and what are the different 
system components, how this could be laid out in the field. We will also discuss about 
some of the points which are dealt with in the design of micro irrigation system. 
 
So, as it says, that the micro sprinklers are of low capacity water emitting devices and 
they fall under the category of sprinkler type, but smaller in than conventional 
sprinkler irrigation system, and the discharge rate is relatively lesser. It is about 250 
liter per hour up to this discharge this delivers the water. 
 
These micro sprinklers are placed on relatively close rectangular or triangular spacing 
depending on the requirement and they are given appropriate overlap. These could be 
used to irrigate close-growing crops, potatoes, carrots, leafy vegetables, and 
groundnut. This has been found that these crops response is much better. This method 
is reliable, highly efficient, and easy to operate and handle. 
 
The system is seasonal means one can use it and then bring it back after the crop 
season is over. It operates at low pressure. It has a solid set installation, means once it is installed then at the end of the crop season the system can be removed or brought 
back, and then again it can be reinstalled when new irrigation, a new crop is being 
planted. 
 
The micro sprinklers differ from each other with respect to their size, shape, its 
performance and according to the operating principle micro sprinkler can be broadly 
classified as rotating type or static type. So in the case of rotating a hollow rotor is 
provided just above the nozzle and in which the water comes out under pressure. 
Unlike overhead sprinklers, micro sprinkler does not have any striking arm to rotate. 
 
This is what you see here on the top in the water is coming means here there is a 
micro tube, water comes with the pressure and then there is enough pressure that 
causes the rotation and then the water is coming out of the sprinkler and that sprinkles 
around that. 
 
The curvature of the rotor is so designed that it is pushed by the pressure of water 
flowing through it and it starts rotating in the opposite direction of the curvature. So 
curvature here is provided in the rotor. Accordingly, this guides the sprinkler to rotate. 
 
In the case of a static type micro sprinkler, there is no rotor. Instead, a flat or conical 
hard plate is just above the nozzle so that water coming out through the nozzle strikes 
against it and it spreads in all direction. This is the gap which you are seeing on the 
top of this particular plate. So this is a hard plate and then this is serrated. 
 
So at the time, the hard plate becomes serrated so that the water can be ejected 
through these serrations in all directions. This is what you see how the water is 
coming out on the top. So water is getting distributed all throughout. So there is equal 
distribution of water in all or particular specified directions. Maybe at a certain part, it 
is kept open and certain it is closed. So maybe it is used for half the circle or one 
quarter of the circle or full circle. 
 
Micro sprinkler assembly essentially consists of a head, micro tube. So this part is 
head. If you see here this is the head part and then there is a micro tube which is 
known as spaghetti which connects to the lateral pipe. So this end here which we are seeing here, there is a connecting nozzle or it is similar to the barb which looks like 
the drip emitters. 
 
So supporting stake, there is a supporting stake, this is the stake which holds the 
micro sprinkler at a specified height from the ground. So if the crop height is a little 
large, then this stake is further extended and then another radar plastic rod is made so 
that the height can be increased. The head of the micro sprinkler is basically a rigid 
frame and is made up of a plate. 
 
The water emitting nozzles are fixed in different ways to sprinkle water. It is the 
frame which guides the micro sprinkler to precipitate water in different patterns and 
directions. So on the top or in the side or depending on the way the serration, it has 
been made, accordingly, the water distribution it takes place. The internal diameter of 
the water emitting nozzle is very small. It could be in the order of 1 to 2 millimeter 
through which the water comes out under pressure. The size of the water particle 
depends upon the internal diameter of the emitting nozzle and the pressure behind it. 
 
The micro tube is a semi-rigid tube which is made up of LLDPE that is linear low-
density polyethylene. The internal diameter of the micro tube is 3 to 6 mm. It joins the 
inlet opening of the micro sprinkler with the lateral line. A small connector nozzle is 
also provided at the end of the micro tube to connect it to the lateral pipe. So one end 
is connected with the microtubule with the lateral pipe and the other end is connected 
with that nozzle.  
 
The size of this connector depends upon the size of the micro tube. So this connector 
will be according to the size of the micro tube. So this is what you can see here. This 
is one type of thing that it means, this part it goes to the lateral. So this is the threade d 
part. So sometime s, there are other types of micro sprinklers directly that can be 
attached. 
 
So this part goes to the micro sprinkler which is fitted here. Another part is also. So 
instead of putting into the lateral, they are means discharge micro sprinklers are there 
where this arrangement is normally used. This is another type, threaded, so the threaded part is connected with the micro sprinkler. Another part, this is barbed which 
goes inside this particular is connected this goes inside the lateral pipeline. 
 
And barbed-barbed, so this is another kind of arrangement that both the ends barbed 
to the micro tube. One end goes to the micro tube, the other end it goes to the lateral 
pipeline. So it will depend upon the type of micro sprinkler which we are using and 
then the size. 
 
Orifice control micro sprinkler, the most common type of micro sprinkler are orifice 
control emitters where the flow rate at any given pressure is governed primarily by the 
orifice diameter. So it is the relationship because orifice type when we are talking 
means Q is directly proportional to the area and the square root of the operating 
pressure. 
 
So Q is equal to Cd into the area multiplied by the root 2gH. So H becomes your 
operating pressure. So orifice control emitters are turbulent flow devices where the 
flow rate is regulated by dissipating energy by the friction of water against the wall of 
the passages and between the fluid particles themselves. Turbulent flow emitters have 
shorter flow paths and larger diameter passages than laminar flow devices. 
 
So the concept is the same as being used in the case of the micro irrigation drip 
emitters we discussed. The basic fundamental which are used there these are also used 
for orifice control type of micro sprinklers. The flow velocities are greater and the 
potential for clogging is less than the laminar flow devices. And with orifice control 
emitters, the orifice diameter at the base of the emitter determines the flow rate. 
 
So top of the emitter determines the pattern and diameter of spread. Mainly micro 
sprinkler we use when the crop is close spacing, besides this clogging is another thing. 
So this is the important part that when the quality of water is poor and drippers as well 
as filters it gets clogged repeatedly. In that case, because the orifice size in the case of  
the micro sprinkler is relatively larger. So the possibility of getting clogged, clogging 
problem is minimum in this case. 
 Vortex flow micro sprinkler is another kind of micro sprinkler. So vortex control 
emitters are less sensitive to pressure variation than laminar or turbulent flow emitters 
and such emitter has the exponent 0.4. This Q that is discharged out of the vortex 
control micro sprinkler is given by discharge Q equal to Kd into P to the power x. P is 
the operating pressure, Kd is the coefficient of discharge, and x is the exponent.  
 
So here vortex flows when we are talking, so x is 0.4. In vortex emitter water is forced 
to form a vortex or whirlpool at the center of the emitter. As water rotates centrifugal 
force pushes it towards the outer edge of the thing. This is what you see here. The 
water is coming and then it is pushing it toward the outer edge. So because of the 
vortex action, this causes the drop in the pressure in the center where the orifice is 
located. And the result is a reduction in the energy of water at the discharge point 
resulting in a controlled flow rate. So emitter flow rate is controlled by the vortex 
design and orifice diameter. This is how it is happening. So this falls under the 
category of pressure compensating. Because it is coming less than 0.4.  
 
Now, specifically pressure compensating micro sprinklers are another part. Here the 
exponent x, it becomes further lesser than 0.1 sometimes or it is between 0 to 0.3 in 
this range all that it is falling under the pressure compensating. 
 
So pressure compensating micro sprinklers, the pressure compensating means use the 
inlet pressure to modify the shape, length, and diameter of the flow path to control the 
flow rate. A diaphragm that is placed over here, which will be coming at this place 
where it is fitted. So this diaphragm it is made up of an elastic material which deforms 
to control the flow rate. 
 
As the pressure increases the diaphragm restricts the passage of diameter. This is the 
beauty of this particular device. So as the pressure compensating emitters are 
designed to discharge fairly constant discharge over a wide range of pressure where 
the emitter exponent is usually 0.1. Theoretically, it should be 0 but 0.1 to 0.3 this is 
the range normally it is given for pressure compensating type of micro sprinklers as 
well as micro pressure compensating drip emitters. 
 A major shortcoming of the pressure compensating emitter is the change in the 
elasticity of the diaphragm over time. So the material it is of high-quality material and 
this material itself is very expensive. This is made up of silica. So if means with the 
time, its elastic property it changes so it does not work. So the characteristics of 
pressure compensating also it changes. 
 
In addition, the diaphragm will often retain some moisture when the pressure is off. 
The moisture may allow microbial growth within the emitter and emitter clogging 
may occur. Another problem can result from the invasion of ants seeking the food 
source all this kind of problem may invade when we are using this kind of drip 
emitters. 
 
The factors that affect the uniformity of water distribution from a micro sprinkler. 
These factors mean they are affected by the hydraulic parameter of the micro 
sprinkler, system parameters of the network, and climatic parameters of the 
environment. These three parameters they influence the water distribution pattern. So 
hydraulic parameters, what are the parameters related to hydraulic? It could be the 
pressure discharge relationship, it can be a correlation with the stake height, rate of 
water application, and then the waiting radius. Another point is the correlation with 
the depth of water application, rate of discharge, and uniformity of water distribution 
with respect to discharge and stake height. 
 
So if someone wants to study and or design the system for a given set of conditions 
then one can also relate for a given particular type of sprinkler how to do such type of 
sprinkler they behave with the pressure discharge relationship where the coefficient of 
discharge, as well as the exponent, can be determined. Then one can also for a given 
set of conditions and then how much is the wetted diameter, how much is the water 
application at a given pressure for a given stake height how does it behave. So this 
relationship can be, so such relationship can be established, and when this particular 
type of a sprinkler, a micro sprinkler system is installed in a field. So this will help to 
obtain the higher uniformity of water distribution. 
 
The system parameter mainly with the pressure losses in the pipe network, the 
influence of climatic parameter. Now climatic parameter, it is the mean wind speed. That also changes the uniformity of water distribution. The temperature of the place, 
because that influences the evaporation. So when the water sprinkles, so droplets get 
evaporated before it falls on the ground or it falls on the plant foliage. Humidity, on 
the evaporation of the sprinkling water, also influences. So such parameters are 
considered while we are interested to get better uniformity. So that should be 
considered while designing. 
 
Now the next point here is system layout and components. So the layout of the system 
it consist of control equipped with regulating valves. More or less the same way, same 
equipment, except fertigation equipment, all other equipment are needed in the case of 
micro sprinkler design. The only thing is that their filter size may be or the mesh size 
will be differing. Of course, that will also depend upon the quality of water.  
 
So these valves mean water regulating valves that is non-return valve, shut off valve, 
as well as a filter. So the 200 to 300 microns or 40 to 60 mesh. And no injectors are 
needed because in this case, fertigation is except in a few fertilizers or chemicals as 
and when needed that can be connected. But as such the other fertilizers because it 
may be harmful to the leaf of the plant. So the fertigation system is not recommended 
to use in micro sprinkler irrigation system.  
 
The arrangement of main and sub-main lines, hydrants manifold is the same as the 
drip irrigation piping network. The size of the manifold feeder lines should be 50 to 
60 mm in case the pipe size is of 75 means in no case it should exceed more than 75 
mm. Now pipelines of 50 to 63 mm are recommended for the flow carrying the water 
of 12 to 18 cubic meter per hour when the water is distributed en route continuously. 
For that purpose, such type of layout is suggested. And then the pipes used for the 
systems distribution network are mainly rigid PVC pipelines. It would be PVC or the 
HDP that can be laid and these can be laid above the line. This could be laid below 
the ground surface depending on the conditions available there. 
 
Irrigation scheduling. This system enables a high degree of control both when to 
apply and how much irrigation water to apply. Means the timing, as well as the depth 
of water, is to be taken into consideration. That is how irrigation scheduling is defined. So restrictions imposed by the system are limited. Thus, there are more 
timing options in the irrigation scheduling program. 
 
The vegetables are mostly shallow-rooted crops. So selected option is generally that 
of fixed depletion irrigation. Means the fixed depletion that can be applied. The 
application depth of about 20 to 30 mm is common. Of course, such values are to be 
determined depending on the climatic condition, depending on the particular type of 
crop and it ’s rooting depth. 
 
But this is a general value that one can use this depth of irrigation. And total water 
requirement it varied from 300 to 400 mm in terms of depth. This is for the whole 
crop season. And the total number of irrigation required is about 12 to 15 at 
appropriate intervals. 
 
So here in a micro irrigation system or whether it is a micro sprinkler or drip irrigation 
system, we are mainly focusing that the water means soil moisture depletion should 
not be more and it should be at the field capacity so that the plant does not have to 
suffer due to moisture content unless and until there is a shortage of water supply. 
Then the deficit water supply program can be made where strategy can be made to 
supply water at deficit way without compromising the yield of the crop. 
 
Emitter wetting pattern you can see here that this is one of the wetting patterns where 
you see a wetting pattern of a spinner type of micro sprinkler. So in the case of a 
spinner kind of a micro sprinkler, what we see the wetting is near the sprinkler head. 
On this particular side, you can see that this is the center at which the sprinkler stake 
is there. And when the spinner type of sprinkler is there, this is a typical water 
distribution pattern but more depth of water is obtained that is based on the research 
carried out. It is obtained near the sprinkler stake. So wetting patterns of a micro 
sprinkler are important for sandy soils where root zones are shallow. This is for a 
specific case for sandy soil. 
 
And spinner emitters are of higher application uniformity than spray-type of emitters. 
Both types of emitters will give higher uniformity when pressure is higher than 103 
kilopascal. Now, this is the value. So what you see, the water availability is six times more than the outer periphery. So this is the typical water depth pattern. And then this 
is another type of wetting pattern for the spray type of micro sprinkler where in case 
of spray type of micro sprinkler we see the water depth of water at the outer periphery 
are considerably large as compared to the near this stake. So this is another way that 
the how water distribution it is it has taken place. 
 
So by using the catch can the data were collected and then it is found that how the 
data, how the moisture distribution or droplet distribution it takes place. So on either 
side of the data where it is seen that it is about 3 m on either side. So this is the more 
or less, you can see here about 2.5 meter is the radius of the coverage. And then at the 
outer radius, the depth of water is more as compared to the center. 
 
Design criteria for micro sprinkler deliver the water in a low application rate and in 
fine drops. Such drops mean these could be easily drifted by wind or air. So we need 
to take or when we need to operate the system when there is a less or moderate or no 
wind condition exist. Then if the wind is a problem then the overlap should be 
increased, overlaps should be increased. 
 
So in order to ensure high uniformity of water application, the spacing should be 
decreased or overlap should be increased, we can say, not exceeding 50% of the 
diameter of coverage. So sprinkler spacing along the lateral and between the lateral it 
is normally given as 5 to 7 meter. 
 
So this is what you see when the sprinkler, this is the sprinkler and this is the wetting 
circle it has been formed. And then another sprinkler which is placed. So here it is 
about 50% overlap it is given. So this keeps on overlap so the water which is getting, 
received by the land surface. So this kind of soil moisture distribution takes place. 
 
So individually sprinklers overlapped and resulting distribution of water in the soil. 
So individual sprinkler overlap it looks like this and then when the resulting 
distribution of water soil moisture it is it looks uniform. So this is the requirement for 
getting very good higher application efficiency. Hence, the common spacing is 5 m by 
5 m, 5 m by 6 m. So depends on the particular type of emitter and its wetting 
diameter. Furthermore, to mitigate the adverse effect of wind relatively large number of 
sprinklers per unit area should be operated simultaneously. The operation shifts 
should be arranged so that the area irrigated at the same time is as compact as 
possible. Generally, micro sprinkler laterals are made up of low-density polyethylene 
pipe of 32 mm diameter and so as to it becomes easy to handle as well as assemble 
and place it to the other site. 
 
The maximum possible length of the various sizes of lateral on the ground level 
depends on the number of sprinklers and the spacing and the flow rate. Another 
component design is similar as we discussed in the case of the drip irrigation system. 
 
So these are the reference books. And so you may please refer these papers, these 
books for your much more detail ed study about this topic. 
 
And so let us summarize this particular lecture. We discussed about what is a micro 
sprinkler and then rotating as well as the static type of micro sprinklers. We also 
discussed about different other types of an orifice, vortex, pressure compensating 
micro sprinkler, wetting pattern of micro sprinkler, irrigation schedule, and design 
consideration. So these points we covered in this particular topic. In the forthcoming 
lecture, we will discuss about the bubbler irrigation system. So thank you very much 
for your kind attention. 
 