Advance Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food  Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 03  
Important Species in Aquaculture  
Hello everyone, welcome to the third lecture series of the m odule 1. My name is Professor 
Gaurav  Dhar Bhowmick , I am from the Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering 
Department from IIT Kharagpur.  So, in this particular module , in this particular lecture series 
where I  will be discussing about the Important Species in Aquaculture under the module of 
Introduction to Aquaculture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:52)  
 
So, the basic concepts that I  will be covering here the classification of fish, basic classification of 
the aquatic species, important cultivable fishes and  shellfish , characteristics of major fishes , 
selection criteria and the broodstock management.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:08)  
 
In case of basic , when we go for the basic classification of fish, we know that they are normally , 
they are generally the cold-blood ed aquatic species that breathe through their gills and swim with 
fins. So, they are categorized as either fin fish or  the shellfish. So, in case of fin fish, they have a 
fins with a ray and also they have the skills covering their whole body normally the carps, 
catfish, tilapia , etcetera . In case of shellfish, they have the various types of organs for locomotion 
and a shell or the exoskeleton , additional exoskeleton covering their body like shrimp and all.  All 
right  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:47)  
 Different ty pe of finfish  you already know , I think most of them the Catla, Rohu, Mrigal, 
Common Carp, Grass Carp, Silver Carp,  in general these six species  itself they constitutes  more 
than 91  percent  of the total car p production in the world.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:0 2) 
 
The Shellfish  they actually classified further as the Crustaceans and the Mollusc.  The 
Crustaceans , they normally , as I already told you like they normally have  a segmented bodies 
covered with the armored like sections of thick  or thin shell and the b eard jointed appendages . 
So, you know about prawn, shrimps , crabs, lobsters, crayfish es, etcetera . 
This Mollusc  they normally have, like, they are normally three types there is  Bivalves , the 
Univalves and the Cephalopods . The Bivalves are, the examples of Bivalves you know the 
clams, you know  the mussels, the oysters . The Univalves , though, like conch,  the conch is the 
one that we normally use it for religious purposes as well to make some specific type of sound , 
whelk et cetera . The Cephalopods like squid s, cuttlefish and  the octopus.  (Refer Slide Time: 03:00)  
 
In case of crustaceans , you see the pictures the shrimps , this one is the  shrimp, the crab , the 
lobster, this is how it looks like the clams, the mussels, the pearl oyster,  the conch , this is the on e 
that we normally use it for the religious purpose as I mentioned . Different types of cephalopods 
like the squid, cuttlefish, and the octopus.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:24)  
 
What are the salient features of this major cultural species like especially the common carp,  
chinese carp , the grass carp,  or most of the IMCs like the Indian Major carps , Rohu, Catla  and 
Mrigal. So, they are the best growth condition for them to have a temperature of around 23 degrees Celsius to 30 degrees Celsius, but it can survive in  cold winters sometimes, like some of 
the species.  
Their pH variability should have range of 6.5 to 9 for their dwelling water bodies . It can tolerate 
low DO levels, 0.3-0.5 milligram per liter, as well as super saturation.  Though we say it a 
supersaturatio n, but like it  is better not to have them in a super saturated oxygen condition , 
dissolved oxygen condition . So, when I talk about saturation, they , I mean say like in 20 degrees 
Celsius, suppose if I  am talking about 20 degrees Celsius in a normal water b ody in a tropical 
region , in 20 degrees Celsius the in STP condition s, the saturation concentration for dissolved  
oxygen is 9.1 milligram per liter . So, if it is more than 9.1 milligram per liter at a particular 
moment of time, I mean like the dissolved o xygen concentration, we call it super saturation level.  
It happens because of certain activities, natural activities and anthropogenic activity as well. I  am 
not discussing about all those things . So, anyway, it can sustain , the carps  can sustain this whol e 
range. This carp  polyculture , it is a very efficient strategy as we discussed in the earlier lectures 
that is this polyculture , why we should go for polyculture and all.  
This car p polyculture it has a very , it is a very efficient strategy which we use to  maximize the 
utilization of natural food options  due to their omnivorous feeding habitats  and all. Carps are 
very frequent , the females usually produce more than 75,000 to 300,000  eggs per kg of their 
bodyweight.  
The most culture carp species  attain the , most of culture car p species, they attain their sexual 
maturity in their third year of their life , so which is pretty low. And so, in that , because of that, 
our whole production system goes well, it can reach 0.6 to 1 kg of body weight in one season and 
in this kind of polyculture fish pond and which also gives us a very high fish , a very high 
productio n, economical benefits as well.  (Refer Slide Time: 05:52)  
 
Tilapia, tilapia is one of the very major fish species that we normally try to culture in  the 
aquaculture ’s tanks in like  in no matter what in even in the tropical regions , subtropical , even in 
temperate region also a specific type of tilapia ’s market is very high. So, they have a very 
desirable flesh qualit y, they have white flesh and with a neutral  taste and a firm texture and 
because of these regions, they have gained wide acceptance global demand all over the world.  
The ease of farming , tilapias are easy to hold and breed in captivity, they can tolerate a little bit 
of crowding, I mean like you kn ow, like the density the stocking density, they can even sustain in 
poor water quality which makes it a very like sought after fish farming culture species, because 
of you know, sometimes the water quality may change a little bit and some other species the y 
cannot sustain even minor change in the environmenta l quality or the water quality.  
So, they have this susceptibility , they this tilapia and they can sustain even relatively poor water 
quality also . They are relatively resistant to the infectious disease s. They can be grown in a wide 
variety of aquaculture systems, it can be open systems, it can be closed sy stems, it can be 
anything, they eat algae and detritus as well , as well as additional artificial plant -based  feed. So, 
when you have the option, you c an feed them ; if you have option, you do  not have to feed them 
because it can sustain in t he natural feed system as well.  
In case of they can reach a typical market size of around 500 to 800 gram in about 6 to 8 months 
under optimum water temperature and w hich is very like which is that is one of the major reason why this kind of tilapia culture is very much sought after all over the world. And also, because of 
the demand market demand market fish demand, tilapia can supply a huge amount of  food. 
(Refer Sli de Time: 07:58)  
 
This is one of the futuristic, not futuristic, it  is still it  is going nowadays also even in future also, 
consumption of tilapia will keep on increasing. Second thing is the shrimp.  The amount of , the 
shrimp  culture, its the most importan t farmed species in shrimp culture  are the black tiger 
shrimps , the Penaeus  monodon  and the pacific white shrimps Litopenaeus vanname i. 
So, these  two species , these two particular species are very much sought after all over the world 
and people are people want to have them because of their specific tastes because of their 
availability because of their market demand  and all . The seed stock for both of these pieces can 
be produced in hatcheries using relatively very simple technologies. It can tolerate a high  range 
of salinity , 1.2 percent  is the full strength ocean waters , 35 to 40  percent  or shall I say 35 PPT to 
40 PPT.  
And this vanname i can grow as well up to 55 PPT so which is like why quite  saline water for 
other species to survive . Readily eat formulate d commercially manufactured feeds are available 
for culturing this kind of shrimps in land and in water bodies as well. Pacific white shrimps has 
some advantages over the black white shrimps.  (Refer Slide Time: 09:17)  
 
And what are the advantages of it b ecause it can breeds  very well in captivity. So, in aquaculture 
systems when you want to have a better yield  and also you want to have a breed  which can 
sustain minor changes in the water quality it can sustain some minor changes in the product 
disputes an d all. 
So, in that case, these shrimps  product disputants,  I mean like you know somehow suppose the 
aeration system has some issue for a couple of minutes and it stops and because of that DO level 
goes down but still, this kind of shrimps  can somehow survi ve. So, I mean, like this is just an 
example that I  am giving you . 
So, this type of situations this kind of breed  can easily sustain and because of that, they are 
considered as they have major advantages over the other shrimp’s species.  The domestication 
and the larval rearing is easier , these systems are easier for this species , it can be stocked at small 
sizes and it can tole rate very high density culture.  
So, which gives us a very high economic benefit. So, it grows first and it grows at a uniform rate 
in general whenever it replicates and produce and it like grows . And has comparatively very low 
protein requirement in general , so the fish feed that you  are providing . In general protein content, 
you want to supply the protein content that is one of the ma jor costs associated with the fish  
breed . So, that also can be minimized with this kind of pacific white shrimps.  It can advert well in the 
variable environmental condition as I already mentioned, it can survive in the hatcheries in 
relatively high , overal l survival for this kind of shrimps are relatively high or around 40 to 60  
percent age. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:08)  
 
Second thing is bivalves.  They are excellent aquaculture material , which requires the very least 
interference human interference I would  say after only after the larval stage, because you do  not 
have to feed them because they are okay with that , they have a very high productivity at a very 
low input culture. The bivalves obtain their food by a filter feeding particulate organic matter, 
includin g the phytoplankton etcetera  from the water . 
So, they are no cost for feeds in the grow  out phases of farming is required and which is a very 
important advantage for this particular type of bivalves culture. It has a potential of treating pond 
effluent so their filter feeding behavior as well, what does that mean? It does mean that these 
bivalves are not only having the food from the natural habitat, but also, they are kind of  treating 
the environment, how they  are treating the environment, they  are utilizi ng the nutrients available 
in the water and even in the wastewater and this the water which has a certain amount of 
obnoxious pollutants, which means certain pollutants which are not desirable, those pollutants 
are being fed by the bivalves . So, I am not g oing to details there are a lot of in depth discussion that we can have in later 
lectures. So, these bivalves are helping us in that way as well , so to help us in environmental, it 
can give us some environ mental benefit as well by this means.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:36)  
 
So, next thing that we want to discuss is the selection criteria of farmed  species . What are the 
criteria that you need to think of or you need to prepare by yourself before choosing any farmed 
species , any species for your farm, for your aq uaculture farm ? It is very easy, you can say by 
yourself only. So, you know, the rate of growth, definitely, it involves, if the rate of growth is 
like it  is very high . 
So, it can grow to a larger size in a very smaller period and which gives us a very goo d like, it 
can easily solve the market demand and  all. It has to have a capacity to adapt to the climate. 
What does that mean, because most of the fishes are very much susceptible, as I mentioned, they 
are very much susceptible to the minor changes in the environment, minor changes in the water 
quality, whereas this we have to find out the species which can sustain even at some sudden  
changes in the climate conditions, the local climate conditions and somehow it can add up to the 
local climat ic conditions o f the farm  easily.  
It should have a tolerance to the wide fluctuations of the physico -chemical conditions . So, also 
almost the same as the earlier discussion that we had . It should accept  the artificial fee d. There 
are features which like, you know, it  is like more like you once you  are well, suppose you  are coming from a different part of the India and you know, that this particular food is what you 
normally used to have and then you go to the other part of the India wh ere that food is not 
available.  
So, y ou have to have unless until you survive, you know to survive in that particular place, you 
have to accept to the artificial feed accept to the feed that is available in that particular zone . So, 
you have to have this readiness, that fish that your targeti ng, it has to have that readiness  to 
survive in that artificial feeds.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:34)  
 
Other criteria’s  are like the resistance , it has a desirability and it has to resist the common disease 
and the attacks by the parasites. It should be amiabl e and comfortable in nature so that it can 
grow together with the other cultural species  and without interfering or attacking the others. 
Some species are you know, no no it is my zone so you just keep away from this place , so it 
should not be like this.  
So, it has to be , it should be amiable and compatible in nature for your target for the target 
species has to has this characteristic so that you can grow them in your system in your farm. T he 
conversion efficiency fish species that give more edible flesh p er unit of food that it consumes is 
obviously preferred.  Because you do  not want to have fish or you do  not want a culture 
something which requires a huge amount of feed but the ultimate production produces very less . So, this conversion efficiency is anot her very important selection criteria for these farmed 
species  and one of the most important the consumers preference. You do  not go for culturing you 
know keep on culturing tilapia once you see the end local customer is not happy with the , local 
consumers  is not happy with the tilapia they want to have a shrimp  in that particular season . So, 
like some other species, but you keep on supply them with a tilapia they were like No, no, I  am 
not going to have it and let  us have something else , some alternative  food. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:07)  
 
So, the consumer preference is very important, which we have to take care of before selecting a 
particular species for our farm. N ext thing that we  will be discussing about is the broodstock  
management . There are a couple o f important aspects that we need to take care of it like during 
the rearing  process . 
The selection of fish, the selection of fish, with the desirable hereditary qualities like rapid 
growth potential, it should have a higher resistance to the dissolved oxyg en deficiency and 
adverse water quality, it should have a strong appetite and omnivorous feeding regime . So, once 
you have these particular qualities , then you just go for choosing that patient , you just go for you 
know go for the broodstock management . 
So, selection of fish with well developed reproductive organs are very much important , that is 
another important criteria. Rearing  of these selected fish to produce healthy potential spawners  with dormant eggs well developed in the females are actually very much needed . So, which is 
another aspects of this  kind of rearing processes.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:10)  
 
The selection of fish with desirable hereditary  qualities like rapid growth potential as I already 
discussed, like it has to have a very strong appetit e omnivorous feeding regime. The  desirable 
qualities in a good brooder  fish, the fish , the selected fish, it has the brooder fish that you are 
selecting for the broodstock  management.  
It has to have a very in a very healthy condition it should have a very good health, no body 
wounds , typically no scale like or no typical scale distribution should be there, there should be no 
parasites attacked, like you know the environment with it, no fin or  body deformations, the body 
should process the required shape and  proportions neither too fat neither too thin. So, it  is just 
perfect for your production , you can choose this kind of brooder fish. 
So, once these are the very important criterias that we have to understand, we need to know once 
we talk about the , once we  talk about the target species or when we start our aquaculture farm. 
So, whatever we have discussed in this particular lecture, we will try to understand we  will try to 
remember these fundamentals  when we go for developing our own farm or when we try to 
consult , say like suppose you will become a consultant or you will become an engineer, 
aquaculture engine er or aquaculture technologist.  So, what you need to do ? Once your customer or once buyer will come to you that I need to , can 
you please design me a fa rm for my practice for my economic benefit?  So, what are the sectors , 
what are the factors that I need that I need to abide by? What are the sectors that I need to think 
of before developing my own farm?  
So, then you have to show them you have to tell him or her that Okay, so see once you go for 
farming once you go for developing your own aquaculture farm, what you need to do you need 
to choose proper species, what species you  are targeting and what is the reason for choosing that 
specie is that you have to  make sure , that you have to let him or her understand that come on if 
you want to choose an exotic species, which are not actually have any demand in your local 
market or suppose even in distance local market . 
So, you do  not want to produce that culture species in your farm. The farm that you  are 
developing in a particular area, if it does  not have any proper brooder fish available for you so 
you do  not want to go for you just need to find out different stages of development for your farm 
and at different stages of day development what are the necessary factors that you have to think 
that you have to think upon that it  is very important being an aquaculture technologist or an 
aquacult ure engineer or even aqua culturist.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:16)  
 
So, these  are the references from which I have taken some of the information so you can go 
ahead with these literatures  to have a better understanding about the stuff that I have already just now discussed. And we  will go ahead with like this . And in the later lect ures, we  will be 
discussing more on this technology aquaculture technology and how what are the way forwards  
and what are the changes that is happening nowadays all over the world, what are the 
technologies that the researchers are putting forward and how they can be used , you know  to 
help your development of your farm . 
Or suppose your knowledge base on this aquaculture subject, so that once you will become an 
Aquaculture Specialist, you can give these suggestions to your client that, so, ok go ahead with 
this and this is the thing , these are the things necessary for developing your farm and this is the 
very, this has a very high like very high demand in the very near future, as I already discussed in 
like previous lectures and just this is this is it . So, I think in the next lecture and coming lectures, 
I will be discussing about these things in more in details. Till then, thank you.  