Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Module  02: Technology  of Closed  Aquaculture  
Lecture  08 
Re-Circulatory  System  
Hello  everyone,  welcome  to the lecture  3 of module  2 of advanced  aquaculture  technology  
course,  I am professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  from  agriculture  and food engineering  
department,  IIT Kharagpur.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:35)  
 
 
So, these  are the concepts  that will be covered  in this particular  lecture  material.  The 
introduction  to the recirculating  aquaculture  system,  the components  associated  with it. The fish cultures,  what  are the fish that we normally  culture  in RAS  technology,  and merits  and 
demerits  of RAS  technology  in general.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:52)  
 
As, we already  have  the some  basic  idea about  what  is recirculating  aquaculture  systems,  as 
we have  already  discussed  in earlier  lectures  in brief.  So, it’s actually  a recirculating  
aquaculture  system  it is a land based  closed  system  used for culturing  the aquatic  organisms,  
it involves  the rearing  of fishes  in indoor,  or outdoor  tanks  within  a controlled  environment.  It 
involves  the recycling  and reuse  of the waste  culture  water  after mechanical,  biological  
filtration,  or the both and the removal  of the suspended  solids,  definitely  by means  of 
mechanical  filtration  process.   
It normally  uses a very minimal  amount  of land and water  because,  it reuse  the water  which  is 
circulating  over the in its units.  It involves  the addition  of new water  only to make  up for the 
evaporation  loss, splash  out, and that uses to remove  the waste  materials.  So, now it is even 
the evaporation  loss has been  also somehow  bypass,  because  the whatever  the control  
environment  that the system  has been  design ed nowadays  by in different  countries,  the 
evaporation  loss is also been  minimized  by capturing  that evaporated  water,  evaporator  
moisture  in the air circulation  units,  and they actually  condense  it back  and they will put the 
that water  is actually  given  back to the systems.   
So that is how the technology  advancement  is been  taking  place  in aquaculture  sectors  and 
that is how evaporation  loss, like the water  which  is due to the evaporation  loss is also being  
somehow,  it is been  make  up by the system  itself.  It in general,  recirculatory  aquaculture  
system,  it reduces  the environmental  impact  and improve  the food security.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  02:35)  
 
So, how it improves  food security?  Because,  it provides  us the additional  amount  of because  
we normally  do the intensive  aquaculture  system  in RAS  technology,  utilizing  this RAS  
units.  So, and also the environmental  point  of view  also less water  uses,  and also the 
whatever  treated,  whatever  the effluent,  whatever  the pollutant  that is being  generated  from  
the cultu re of the aquatic  species,  that is being  taken  care of by the treatment  unit itself.  So, 
we are not throwing  that water  out of out in the surface  water  bodies  which  will create  a 
nuisance  in the system,  and nuisance  in their biological  ecosystem  and all. So, we try to that 
is why RAS  technology  has been  preferred  all over the world.   
The feed that is used it is a high protein  feed with all essential  minerals,  and vitamins  we try 
to produce  and we try to introduce  it to the to our recirculatory  aquaculture  systems  for 
maximum  output.  The species  that is being  cultured  in RAS  systems  it is mainly  the 
Baramundi,  Bhetki,  Cobia,  Silver,  or Indian  Pompano,  Tilapia,  Pearl  Spot,  Karimeen,  
Pangasius,  Rainbow  Trout  etcetera,  etcetera.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  03:42)  
 
So, the components  that involved  with the RAS  is mainly  the tanks,  like the grow  out tanks,  
the settling  tanks,  the water  storage  tanks,  and the overhead  tanks.  There  are pumping  units  
which  are also the part of RAS  unit which  are actually  in the pumping  the water from  the 
aquaculture  wastewater  that is coming  out of the system  to the different  filtration  units.  Then  
the filtration  unit comes,  where  the suspended  solid  filtration,  suspended  solids  removal  is 
happening  in the mechanical  filters,  the glass  wool  on the muslin  cloth  filter,  drum  filter,  
biofilters,  where  normally  the bioconversion  of the pollutants  to the favourable  bioproducts  
will happen,  it normally  happens  in the biofilters.   
Then  the UV unit to further  get rid of all the unwanted  microorganisms  from  the wastewater.  
Then  the sludge  and settable  solid  collectors  are also there  where  the whatever  the filtered,  
settled,  filtered  solids  which  are actually  taken  out from  the system  that collector  of the there  
is a system  there  is a continuum  way we want to collect  those  sludge  and all. And this sludge  
is actually  sometimes  beneficial  because  it is very rich in nutrients.  So, you can utilize  it for 
different  purposes  like bio fertilizers  and etcetera.  After  obviously,  you can go for drying  and 
etcetera,  and after the drying  is done,  then it can be used for different  other  purposes  as well 
as production  of biogas  and all, so, it is possible  in certain  cases.   
The aeration  and the oxygenation  in it, which  is very like one of the major  components,  
because  you need  to provide  dissolved  oxygen  through a erator  to your aquatic  species  all the 
time,  because  unless  and until they are having  ample  amount  of oxygen  present  in the system  
and, because  we are doing  intensive  aquaculture,  because  we are not introducing  any natural  
fertilization  system  or natural  feed supply  system  in this particular  case.  So, what  happened,  the whole  aquatic  species,  all the farming  in its day are entirely  depending  on the aeration  and 
the food that we feed,  that we are providing.   
So, this aeration  is very important,  it has to be there  and you have  to be very cautious  
whenever  you will be designing  aerators  units,  aeration  units,  so, the number  of aerators  that 
is actually  ample  enough  to make  that DO level  of the system  around  4 to 6, try to do it. And 
if not, at least,  try to make  it 2 to 3 so that the oxygen  availability  for and it also depends  
upon  the aquatic  species  that you are culturing.  Sometimes  Tilapia  can sustain  a very low 
dissolved  oxygen  level,  this type of fishes,  but there  are certain  amount of certain  type of 
fishes  which  cannot  sustain  DO level  less than 4.  
So, in order  to identify  to go for the aerated  unit design  and all, you have  to understand  what  
are the aquatic  species  that will culturing  in your system.  Carbon  dioxide removal  system,  
degasser  at the end which  is very important  the water  supply  system  proper  conduct  lines  and 
all. Water  testing  it is very important  to get to know  about  the what  are the parameters,  the 
quality  of the water  after even  being  treatment,  the treatment  is being  done.  The inputs  like 
seed,  feed,  additives,  or the supplements  are also involved  with it. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  06:45)  
 
So, this is a typical  design  of a recirculating  aquaculture  system  as you can see, the from  the 
pond,  if you see from  the pond  the water  is coming  to the first mechanicals  filter,  in the 
mechanical  filter  all the suspended  solids  of the heavy  materials  are like actually,  like taken  
out. And then,  all like the particles  which  are having  certain  like specific  gravity  and also 
specifi c which  are having  higher  in a particular  size is being  taking care of by the this 
particular  unit. And then,  it comes  to the UV filter  when  it kind work  on the amount  of microorganisms  present  on in the system,  then it comes  to the carbon  dioxide  strippers  and 
also then to the biological  units.   
If this units  this is not fixed,  this actually  varies,  the place  of this per individual  unit varies  
with the type of design,  or the type of target  species,  with the type of wastewater  quality  that 
you are expecting.  So, this is not fixed.  And in the biofilter  we normally  use it see, at the end 
where,  is this there  is split loop designed  biofilter  is provided,  in this biofilter  it can be 
moving  bed biofilm  reactor,  it can be membrane  bioreactor.  So, there are different  options.   
So, what  is this moving  bed biofilm  reactor  what  is membrane  bioreactor?  Maybe  you can 
discuss  well I cannot  discuss  about  all these  things,  all this wastewater  treatment  technology  
at this moment,  maybe  later on in the later lectures  you will find it or else you can Google  it 
like what  is moving  bed biofilm  reactor,  what  is membrane  bioreactor,  how it works?   
So, I am giving  a very brief  about  it. So, normally  we provide  it with a different  bio medias  it 
is like a plastic  normal  coils  we provide.  In this plastic  coil, it has a very high specific  surface  
area.  So, and also because  of providing  enough  amount  of aeration,  and the amount  of 
nutrient  present  in the wastewater  what  happened  different  kinds  of nitrifying  bacteria  will 
grow on its surface,  not only nitrifying,  different  other  types  of bacterias  will also grow  in the 
surface  of this biofilters  bio medias.  So, in this bio medias,  so this nitrifying  these  bacteria  
what  they do they consume  the nutrient  present  in the wastewa ter and they convert  that 
chemic al composition  to the to their biomass.    
Whatever  there  in the nutrients  present  into this wastewater  they convert  it to into their 
biomass,  and that biomass  is easily  separable.  So, by this way,  we can get rid of the nutri ent 
present  in the wastewater,  and wastewater  can be purified  by this way.  So, then this 
wastewater  is again  taken  back  to the tank.  So, this way the treatment  of wastewater  is 
happening,  and after then the treated  water  is again  circulated  back  to the tank. So that is why 
it is called  recirculating  aquaculture  systems.   
Now,  this is I am discussing  this system  as it gross. So as a whole,  there  are individual  units  
which  are varied,  like depending  upon,  it is all together  different  type of systems,  dependin g 
upon  the expectation  of the customer,  or expectation  of the bio row, expectation  of your 
designs  firm and all. (Refer  Slide  Time:  09:42)  
 
You can see this is another  typical  example  of high-tech marine  recirculatory  (())(9:53)  
aquaculture  systems,  wher e you can see the fish tank,  both of the fish tanks having  2 cubic  
meters  of volume.  Where  the water  which  is coming  out of the fish tank is introduced  to the 
unit A, and B if you can see the first the microscreen  drum  filter  from  there  to the pump  
preserv er, that arrow  sign is showing  it means  the pump.  
So, it is taking  that water  from  after the screening  is done  in microscreen  drum  filter,  that 
water  is taken  to the number  C, which  is a carbon  dioxide  stripper.  After  the carbon  dioxide  
stripper,  it is coming  down  to the protein  skimmer,  through  prote in skimmer  it comes  to the 
nitrifying  moving  bed biofilm  bioreactor  MBB,  or MBBR  sometimes  it is called.   
In MBBR  you see this small  black  thing  is what  actually  those  are actually  different  bio 
media  or which  is involved,  in this bio media  there  are a lot of different  types  of 
microorganisms  there.  So, these  microorganisms  what  they do? They  consume  the ammonia,  
or consumed  the pollutant  and present  in the wastewater  and they convert  it to the nitrate  or 
nitrite and also even  in certain  places  this somehow  anaerobicity  can be prepared,  the 
anaerobic  in that condition  the denitrifying  microorganisms  can also start working  on it and 
nitrate,  nitrite  can also be converted  to the dinitrogen  gas on N2 gas.  
So, once  it is possible,  once  it is converted  to the nitrogen  what  happened  all the ammonia  is, 
all the nitrogen  species  is removed  from  the system,  then it goes to the number  F, which  is 
like the oxygenator  low head  oxygenator  or the like simply  if I say it is a type of aerator.  So, 
we are supplying  the oxyge n to your system  and then it goes to the G which  is another  pump  reservoir.  From  there,  the pump  is actually  taking  the water  to the taken  back  to the fish tank.  
So that is the clean  water  again.  So, this way the water  circulation  is being  taking  place.   
Other than that, if you go to the red line, if you consider  into the red line where  the mostly  the 
anaerobic  and like anoxic  zone  is prevailed  here.  So, what  is happening  all the sludge,  all the 
micro  skin filter sludge  which  is producing  there  that is come  to the sludge  collection  tank,  
which  is number  H, from  there  it goes to the sludge  dilution  tank which  is like A, and from  I 
and from  there  it goes to the deanammox  fixed -bed up-flow biofilter.  So, that is also type of 
bioreactor  where  deanammox  is like it is a type of microorganisms,  which  are present  in the 
system,  which  actually  utilize  the water  or the whatever  the pollutant  present  in the incoming  
waste,  and that they utilize  in their converted  to the further bio-products.   
And this, from  there  it goes to this bio gas collecting  unit. You see the number  K, and from  
there  it will see the again  like the water  which  is like collecting  which  is purified  in the 
number  J or like fix bed after bioreactor,  that is also called  again  coming  back  to the this 
initial microscreen  drum  filter  and the by this way,  the whole  recycled  aquaculture  system  is 
working.  So, this is only a type of design  that is available  in literature  if you go for Y. Tal et 
al., 2009.  The refer ence is given  at the end, they have  nicely  designed  this system  and it is 
already  available,  and these  kind of design  is already  available.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:07)  
 
So, giving  you another  model  technical  specification  for Tilapia  culture  in a recycled  
aquaculture  systems.  So, suppose  we are targeti ng the Nile Tilapia,  the tank size is say like 
6.7 * 6.7* 2 like length , width  and height,  total volume  of around  90 m3 or stocking  sizes  
fingerlings  of 6000  per tank,  survival  rate is around  90 %, the food conversion  ratio of 1:1.3, and the culture  period  of around  6 - 7 months,  cost of seed s.2 metric  tonne  and the size of the 
time of harvest  will be size at the time of harvest  will be around  500 gram  at the end of 6 
months.  So, total expected  bio mass  will be 2.7 metric  tons.  So, we can see the difference  
there  and also the sale price  will be around  140 rupees  per kg in general.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:03) 
 
So, that is how we, this is just giving  you some  basic  example  of how we do the calculation.  
It is not fixed  for any particular  region  and all, it can vary drastically  place  to place,  and in 
different  consideration  and design  values  that we input.  So, there  are like capital  cost which  
involved  with designing  of this RAS,  there  are like input  costs,  there  are like recurring  costs,  
there  are non-recurring  cost, and based  on that we go for the deposition  value  calculation,  and 
we do the total amount  at the end how much  is the cost for each unit, or of these  RAS  and all.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  14:41)  
 
So, I will be discussing  about  more  in details,  about  this cost analysis  of aquaculture  sector,  
aquaculture  farm.  How  we do it? How  we can do it more  precisely  so that we have  in depth  
idea about  the amount  of benefit  that we are getting  out of the system?  The demeri ts, and 
demerits  of RAS  technology,  in general  the advantages  which  involved  with the RAS  
technology  are it is low water  and land requirement,  prolo ng durability  of the tanks  and 
equipments,  easy rectification  of water  quality  parameters.  Reduced  direct  operational  cost 
associated  with a predator,  or parasite  control  on the feed.  Because  which  is not possible  in 
case of open  channel,  or in case of sorry open  culture  and all, it is not possible  in this case of 
only in case of RAS  we can control  these  things.   
We can have  a very high stocking  density,  and very high food to feed conversion  ratio.  You 
know  what  is feed conversion  ratio?  The amount  of feed the aquatic  species  is taking  and that 
how much  is like convert  how what  is the portion  of it as actually  converted  to its biomass.  
So, that is called  the feed conversion  ratio.  So, that is also very much  high in this particular  
case.  It reduces  the anti presents  the requirement  of antibiotic,  pesticides,  or the vaccine  uses 
in the system.  It improve  the health  and also the production  of the fish species,  or the any 
cultures  aquatic  species  that is what  that we are doing  in recircular  aquaculture  system.   
But, it comes  with the some  disadvantages  the major  disadvantages  is because  it is 
completely  artificial,  it is completely  anthropogenic  activity,  complete  human  presence  is 
required,  or the complete  automation  is required,  in that automation  we have  to make sure 
that it has uninterrupted  power  supply,  if it does not have  uninterrupted  power  supply  what  
will happ en? If for some  time,  if even  for very few minutes,  the aeration  system  starts  not working,  or say like feeder  is not working  for like 1 hour,  like 2 hour 3 hour,  say something  
like that.  
So, depending  upon  the species  and the maturation  stage,  it can cause drastic  effect  in your 
system,  it can cause  complete  loss of your aquatic  output  from  your farm.  So, that is a very 
big of a disadvantage  added  to the RAS  technology.  And,  also it involves  a very high capital  
cost in the beginning,  compared  to the ponds , and raceways.  But with time,  definitely  with 
the benefit  that we will be getting  from  selling  your product  and all. So, the payback  period  is 
also less so, but it involves  with the basic  high capital  costs,  which  actually  problematic  
issues.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:22)  
 
So, it reduces  the overall  environmental  impacts,  and improves  the food security,  as we have  
discussed  and it reduces  the utilizatio n of the therapeutants,  and facilitators,  high food 
conversion  ratio,  and production  rates,  most  of the fish species  can be reared  using  the RAS  
technology.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  17:40)  
 
So, what  will be the takeaway  message  from  this lecture?  That the recirculating  aquaculture  
system,  it is a high-tech intensive  closed  aqua  culture  system,  which  are being  practi ced all 
over world  nowadays  in all the aquaculture  farm, most  of the aquaculture  farm, like where  we 
try to avoid  any kind of environmental  impact,  where we try to improve  the food security,  
where  we try to involve  the minimal  use of land and water,  and also we try to reduce  the 
utilization  of therapeutants,  where  we want  to facilitates  the more  higher  amount  of fish 
conversion  ratio.  So, all these  cases we introduce  the recirculating  aquaculture  system.  And,  
it will give us some  economic  benefits  as well.  So, that is all for. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:27)  
  
These  are the references  that you can go ahead  and you can search  for more  understanding  
about  the system.  And,  that is it for this lecture.  So, we will discuss  about  more  in details  in 
the coming  lecture.  Thank  you so much.  