Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Module  02: Technology  of Closed  Aquaculture  
Lecture  09 
Flow -Through  System  
Hello,  everyone.  Welcome  to the advanced  aquaculture  technology  course.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:32) 
 
My name  is professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  I am from  the agriculture  and food 
engineering  department  of IIT Kharagpur.  So, in this particular  lecture,  we will be discussing  
about  the flow-through  system , for the module  2, technology  of closed  aquaculture .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:44)  
 The concepts  that I will be covering  in this particular  lecture  is the introduction  to the flow-
through  system s, what  are the type of flow-through  systems ? Like, conventional  one, 
intensive  ones. And what  are the merits , and demerits  related  to these kind of flow-through  
systems .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  1:01)  
 
Flow-through  systems , it is actually  intensive  land-based  aquaculture  systems.  So, in general,  
we use these kind of systems  is not used in semi  intensive , or extensive  aquaculture  because  
it doesn’t   make  sense  to involve  this much  of in the design  and the engineering  prospects  
involved  with this particular  flow-through  systems  are not viable  for other  aquacu lture units  
like another  intensive  ones. It involves  rearing fishes  at high stocking  density  in long, or 
narrow  ponds  or tanks,  it requires  abundant  amount  of continuous  water  flow.  So, that is the 
reason  why it is called  flow-through  systems .  
It facilita tes the high degree  of control  over the environment  for the of the species  that you 
we are culturing  the in our aquaculture  pond , or in aquaculture  raceway.  I mean  like in 
aquaculture  pond , or aquaculture  tank whatever  it is. In the flow-through  systems , the most  
common  facilities  are like involved  with the trout  culture , different  kind of trout,  rainbow  
trouts  and etcetera , etcetera. So, this is very much  famous  in the all the western  countries  in 
general , and also in India  also we are using  it now,  it is in a large  number .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  2:05)  
 
Continuous  flow of this water . Actually , which  is happening  in this kind of flow-through  
systems , which  actually  ensure  the proper  oxygenation  and also flushes  out all the metabolic  
wasted , that is waste  that is generated  out of the aquaculture  species  and all. So, in general,  
this the systems  this kind of flow-through  system  is usually  in the shape  of rectangle,  
definitely  we try to make  it in a rectangle  shape  in general,  I will discuss  you in I will show  
you the picture  how it looks  like. So, other  than that, it can be circular , if there  are possibility  
of making  it in other  shapes  as well,  but rectangular  are the one which  is like very famous  
one, and which  we normally  try to have  it in our system  in our farm and all.  
It generally  a design  made  of reinforced  concrete  or the earthen  material  with the inner  
surface  covered  with plastic  or the linen  material.  Sometimes  it can be of only plastic  
material , or nowadays  we use this HDPE s and all. So, that can also be used, and there  are 
possibility  of using  it, designing  it with the FRP materials  also like fibre  reinforced  plastics  
and all. Other  than that, metal  or wood en-based  flow-through  systems  are also there  
depending  upon  the place  of culture  and all.  
The water supply,  it can be of two types  in general,  the conventional  one is like, you are 
providing  water  in the same  direction  and just go keep  on going  and keep  on flowing  through  
it and there  is another  one intensive,  where  we have  the intensity  echo  when  we go for further  
a higher  stocking  density,  we have  to provide  it with the additional  amount  of the water  
supply  units , which  we considered  as the intensive  water  supply  systems.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  4:12)  
 
This is a standard  schematic  diagram  of represen tation  of the flow-through  tanks,  the water  
sampling,  you can see the water  meter  from  the water  supply  line through  the water  supply  
pipe the water  is coming  which  is like INF means  like inflow,  the inflow  is coming  to the 
culture  tank, where  the no way, we normally  go for this make  up water  sampling , that water  
sampling  is done  there.   
Then  in the water  tank in the fish tank,  the fish or whatever  the cultural  species  we are 
targeting  those  are being  those  normally  have  been  rear. There  we have  this water  sampling  
units , you can see WS they are, these  units , these sampling  units  are used for continuous  
monitoring  of the quality  of the water  that you are supplying  and the quality  of the water  that 
is prevailing  in the tank.   
So, it is very much  like predomin antly  use, these kind of sampling  techniques  and all, grab 
sampling  or. So, then from  this fish tank,  the water  is coming  out it comes  to this swirl  
separator . So, why do we need  this kind of swirl  separator?  So, all the actually , the amount  of 
the waste  that is generated  from  this intensive  aquaculture  units  are very high. In general , 
they have  this very huge  amount  of suspended  solid,  they can have  a huge  amount  of nitrogen  
species  and all, so which  are also converted  into the biomass  and they can also be sedimented  
there , and those  solid  material , those  suspended  solid  materials  are actually  being  collected , 
and is separated  using  this swirl  separator  units.  
In the swirl  separator  unit, you can see in the vortex  region  that it generate  the vortex  region  
in this hooper  like structure , at the end, so, it we can get the sludge  discharge,  you can see SD 
this sludge  discharge  unit. So, from  that we get the sludge  out of it, which  are in general  the thickened  slurry  kind of it looks  like thicken  slurry , and this slurry  is actually  very rich in 
different  nutrients  and all. So, we want  sometimes  to be like, with this kind of biomass  this 
kind of I mean  like the sludge  actually  has a very high potential  to be used in for different  
purposes.   
So, normally  it is used for fertilization , bio fertilizer  application,  we can use it for different  
other  purposes  as well like we can get some  by-products  recovery  also from  this system s, and 
we can use it for fertilization  and all, anyway.  So, this swirl separators  at the end of the 
getting , at the end when  the system  is actually  getting  rid of all the solids  present  at least like 
the as much  as possible  the solids  from  the water,  then the clean  water  is going  out of the 
from  the top of it. So, you can see the supernatant  of this swirl  separator  unit is going  OUF,  
you can see the outflow.  So, through  that way,  so, it is getting  out.  
So, all this WS is the point  where  the water  sampling  is taking  place.  So, based  on the water  
sampling , earthen  data that is available,  so what  are the data that we need  normally  look for? 
The suspended  solid,  so, the solid  it can be of different  types, suspended  solid , it can be 
dissolved  solid , etcetera . So, what  is suspended  solid ? There are other  solids  material  as well,  
in general  what  you need  to know ? What is suspended  solid ? The one which  is in suspension  
all the time in the water.  So, the one which  is dissolved  in it, we dissolve  on it which  is very 
hard to segregate  from  this water , it is like all we call it that dissolved  solids  and all.  
And, the other  one which  is having  which  is in a suspended  solids  that we can easily  take out 
using  the simple  filtration  method , we can use this swirl  separator  method  where  we can 
make  a vortex  so, the centrifugal  force,  what  will happen  the stock , the material, the elements  
with the higher  specific  gravity  will be in the peripheral  region , and in the peripheral  region  
and it will keep  on accumulating  in the bottom . Like there  are like technologies  you already  
know  what  is how to use this kind of physical , this phenomena  to getting  rid of the solid  
particles  from  the wastewater.   
So, after the solid  particle  is getting , we can get rid of the solid  particles  the clean  water  that 
is coming  out of the system  is actually  again  be used, reused  can be reused  back  to the tank or 
not. So, it is good  enough  to throw  it to the surface  water  bodies,  but make  sure that you have  
checked  the water  quality  of that before  throwing  into the surface  water  bodies , because  in 
Indian  context  Central  Pollution  Control  Board  has very strict  rules  and regulations  like 
related  to the water , surface  water  discharge.   So, you have  to abide  by those  rules  and regulations  you have  to abide  by all the parameters  
whether  it be pH of the water , if the pH is up and down  like it is not at the range  that it 
requires  you have  to go for neutralization  techniques  and all, if the like it depends  like 
depending  upon  the various  parameters  if the solid  concentration  is still very high,  you cannot  
still throw  it into the solid  water  into the surface  water what  is you have  to make  sure that the 
solid  is completely  removed,  if the suppose  the alkalinity  is very high, if suppose  the 
hardness  is very high or low, so, all these  parameters.   
So, first of all I would  like to request  you to get an idea about  what are the water  quality  
parameters , pH, DO, alkalinity , hardness , nitrogen  content . Nitrogen  content  can be different  
type, total nitrogen  content , total ammoniacal  nitrogen,  total Zn nitrogen,  so these are 
different  terms  that you need  to understand,  you need  to learn,  you can just simply  Google  it, 
it is very easy.  Even  if it is not then maybe  we will discuss  it in during  our live session  that 
we will be having.   
So there  also I will discuss  with you all these  parameters  and how these  parameters  are very 
much  needed , you need  to know  these  parameters  in order  to understand  or the design  your 
aquaculture  farm  in future  because  it is related  to the water , aqua  is water  right ? The water  is 
very important , and you need  to know  each and every  segments  of water  quality  parameters , 
and how those are related  to this kind of flow-through  system , or any kind of aquaculture  
farm  that we will be designing.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:43)  
 
So, the in case of conventional  flow-through  systems  the oxygen  requirement  is deliver ed by 
the normally  the inflow  water , the flow rate of water  required  for the oxygenation  has to be higher  than the flow rate required  to flush  out the metabolic  waste s. So, that you have  to 
make  sure when  you will be designing  and or for your own farm  or maybe  you are a 
technology  provider , or you are a consultant.  So, when  you will be designing  for your 
customer  and then you have  to make  sure that the flow rate is designed  accordingly.  So, there  
it has to be higher  than the flow rate required  for the flush ing out of them , all the metabolic  
waste s from  your system . 
The oxygen  requirement  of the fish, it becomes  a very critical  factor  for the water  flow rate 
calculation , and we can how to do that? The specific  flow rate or the q, that we can easily  
find out by the actual  flow rate, which  is in meter  per hour. So, this water  flow, while  it is 
meter  per hour,  it is actually  meter  cube  per meter  square  per hour.   
So, that is why in general  we say like, m3 of water  flowing  through  a particular  within  a 
particular  hour, or particular  timeframe  for per m2 of surface  area of your this flow-through  
system  and all, so m3 /m2  / h. In short  we say meter  per hour,  the W is the actual  mass  of fish 
in the tank kg, in kg unit. So, if you see the unit for Q the specific  flow rate is meter  per kg 
per hour,  is not it? So, Q / W. So, that is equal  to the DO concentration  and the saturation  
level  which  is g/ m3, which  is C s.  
What is that DO concentration  as satur ation  level ? You need  to remember  this data, this is 
very important , you will be asked  in any kind of competitive  exams  there  is a chance  you 
may be asked  that in general  at 20 degrees  Celsius  DO, all the dissolved  concentration  in STP 
condition  at 20 degrees Celsius  it is 9.07 milligram  per litre, or 9.07 PPM , parts  per million.  
So, that is the DO concentration  at saturation  level , at 20 degrees  Celsius , that with 
temperature  that DO value will up and down . So, based  on the temperature , sometimes  the 
DO concentration,  saturation  DO concentration  can be as high as 11, 12 and as it can be as 
low as 7, 7.5 like that, depending  upon  the temperature  and all.  
So, in general  the when that warmer  area that DO concentration  or saturation  level  is much  
lesser , in case of colder  region  it is much  higher , is not it? That is the reaso n why we go for 
we heat the water  to get rid of all the gases,  this is also standard  degassing  procedures  from  
the water .  
Then the C is the allowable  minimum  DO concentration.  So, suppose  we have  a allowable  
minimum  DO concentration  of around  say like 2 milligram  per litre, or like. So, based  on this 
value,  and the based  on the saturation  value,  and based  on the specific  oxygen  consumption  
rate of the fish, which  is gram  per hour per kg in general.   So, that value  is that value  we can easily  find out in the literature.  So, from  that equation  from  
this equation,  you can easily  calculate  any unknown  fact from  your systems  you can get an 
idea about  the actual  water  flow required  in your system  before  just because  when  you have  
like while  calculating  when  you will have  the idea about  the value  of r, value  of C s and C. So, 
based  on this equation  and value  of W also, say suppose  you know  that the actual  mass of 
fish that is available , based  on this factor,  based  on these  numbers  you can easily  calculate  the 
actua l water  flow that is required.   
Suppose,  the actual  water  flow you know  and everything  you know  from  the calculation , 
from  the pre calculation  stage.  Now,  all of a sudden  you are asked  like what  is the actual  
mass  flow, mass  of fish that is available  in the tank that is also doable.  So, in general  it is 
used for the actual  water  flow calculation,  this equation  and this, this you should  remember . 
This is actually  more  or less same  for all kinds of flow-through  systems.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:04) 
 
The second  one is intensive  flow-through  systems,  it is actually  developed  very recently  with 
the primary  aim of increasing  the stocking  density  or decreasing  the water  flow.  In general , 
the water , the oxygen  requirement  of the fish is provided  by oxygenating  the inflow water,  
what  it happens , the water  before  it is supplied  to the system , supplied  to this kind of flow-
through  system  it is oxygenated,  by using  the oxygenat or.  
What is oxygenated , what  does that mean ? It means  we somehow  increase  the dissolved  
oxygen  concentration  of the inflow  water.  So, there  are various  means  of doing  that, simply  
you supply  the fresh  oxygen  using  oxygen  cylinders,  you can supply  the fresh  air, like from  
the air circulation , aeration  units and all.  So, there  are various  ways  of doing that. But you have  to make  sure that you are oxygenating  
your inflow  water.  So, to a certain  level  that the inflow  the flow-through  system  has enough  
amount  of oxygen,  and so that the, even the increasing  the stocking  density  will not cause  any 
issue  to your system.  So that is why it is called  intensive  flow-through  systems,  the water  
flow can be minimized  because  water  flow is for what ? To addition , to supply  the addition  
oxygen , additio nal oxygen,  but if you can supply  the minimum,  like even  less than the water  
that it requires,  and if you can supply  it with the enough  amount  of oxygen  that it requires  for 
the survival  of the of your aquatic  species,  then that is it, that is what  we need .  
So that is how we take care of the oxygen  requirement  of the fish in the system , in this kind 
of intensive  flow-through  systems  or in short,  we call it IFTs. The flow rate needed  to flush  
out the metabolic  waste  becomes  the critical  factor  for water  flow rate calculations.  So that is 
very important.  And we need  to think we need  to, we need  to make  sure the flow rate needed  
for flush  out of the metabolic  wastes  in the design  calculations  and all. The raceways  are 
actually  a type of intensive  flow-through  systems .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:12)  
 
So, this raceway  and all that we normally  have,  normally  we design,  it is it is a type of typical  
example  of the intensive  flow-through  systems.  So, like, let us talk more  about  like we know  
we have  an, we have  a basic  idea about  what  is the flow-through  systems,  what  are the 
differen t types  of flow-through  systems ?  
Now,  let us talk about  the advantages  and disadvantages , or the pros and cons part of flow-
through  systems . We already  know , while  discussing  that we have  to make  sure that the 
oxygen  is continuously  provided.  So, the continuous  flow maintains  the oxygen  level  and the temperature  and removes  the carbon  dioxide  and the nitrogenous  waste  from  this kind of 
flow-through  systems .  
If it is intensive  one, then this is the same  thing  happened,  but the flow the only the not only 
the flow,  but oxygenation  oxygenator  involves  with the before  putting  the water  into the 
system,  that also helps  additionally,  which  also kind of have  more  advantages  for this kind of 
intensi ve flow-through  system s.  
It can facilitate  a very high production  level  1000  times  more  than the pond culture , can you 
imagine  like the you can just by introducing  these  kind of techniques  by introducing  some  
initial  capital  cost, which  we normally  as a, Indian  context,  we normally  think  like, it is not 
doable  and all. So, but we the problem  is we do not do the economic  analysis,  we do not do 
we only think  about  the cost that involves  in the beginning,  we do not think  about  the benefit  
that we will be getting in a subsequent  timeframe.   
So, if we can design  our system  optimally,  if we can have  our system  scientifically  designed  
and the engineering  the aspects  will be done  properly,  will definitely  get very high amount  of 
production  benefits.  So, it can go almost  1000  times  more  than the general  pond culture  of the 
same  area, like suppose  the same  area if you can compare  in a pond,  like the production  is 
can be like is 1000  times  less than the this flow-through  systems . It facilitates  the discharge  
of effluen t with very lower  concentration  of solids  and nutrients,  which  is also very much  
helpful  in environment  perspective  as well.   
It relatively  easier  for feeding , grading , and harvesting  process,  because  you do not have  to 
worry  about  like because  the feeding  is done,  you just put an automatic  feeder  you can design  
it accord ingly  it will be there  will be like a you need  a circu its and all, it will definitely  
provide  you the amount  of feed that is required , that it requires  with time without  any human  
involveme nt at all .  
What  are the disadvantages  in it? First of all, the flow-through  system  and the raceways  if it 
is not incorporated  inside  a pond, or inside  there  are there  are instances  where  the raceways  
are incorporated  inside  a pond. So, raceway  in-pond  we call it, raceway  in big culture  pond . 
Other  than that it requires  a huge  amount  of water , it is a large  amount  of water  that it 
requires  to how to say exchange  a lot.  
So, that is a bad thing , that is the one of the major  cons part of these  kinds  of technologies . It 
is inability  to self-cleaning,  because  self-cleaning  is only possible  if we increase  the velocity , the flow velocity  up to a certain  level,  but if you increase  that flow velocity  up to a certain  
level  what  will happen ? The fish that they are the dwelli ng there  they will not be able to 
survive  in this harsh  situations  and all.  
So, for them  it is a big of a difficulty , this self-cleaning  procedure  is like if you want  to 
incorporate  self-cleaning  then definitely  for the fish to survive  and go to the upstr eam it is 
really  very difficult  for them  the dwelling  in that zone  will be very much  they will face a lot 
of difficulty  on it. So, that is the same  thing , it poses  the cleaning  difficulties  because  it will 
be like continuous  motion  and all, but not self-cleaning . So, that means,  somehow  you have  
to get rid of all the suspended  solids  that is being  sedimented  with time on the bottom  of this 
culture  tanks .  
It requires  a high amount  of dissolved  oxygen  level  to, level  maintenance . Definitely  because  
once  you do the intensive  aquaculture , it means  that there  are a large number  of fishes  
involved  with it. So, when  there  is a large  number  of fishes  involved  in it, so definitely  you 
have  to involve , you have  to make  sure that dissolved  oxygen  level  of the pond , or the tank is 
never  below  a certain  threshold  limit . It does not have  to be saturation  or it does not have  to 
be near to saturation  level , but it has to be maintained , it has to maintain  a certain  threshold  
limit  based  on the culture  species  that you are culturing  in your treatment  unit.  
Also,  the culture  fishes  they consume  more  food due to the requirement  of the high energy  
for swimming,  in general  what  will happen  it’s like, when  we do more  kind of more gym or 
more  physical  exercise,  we need  more  amount  of food.  So, once  they are in the extensive  
aquaculture  systems, though,  they have  a fast area to cover,  but they feel like, there  is no 
competition  they do not go fast or something.   
But in case of small  aquaculture  systems,  if you if you give it a close r look,  it is so surprising  
though  it has a small  area, very less area to dwell , less area to swim,  but also but still it has 
always  has a lot of neighbouring  species , neighbouring  fishes  with it, and it always  keeps  on 
moving  like here and there  it is like the energy  the swimming  the potential  is becoming  much  
higher in case of intensive  aquaculture  then the extensive  one. 
And which  actually  involves  with a high cost, like involves  with a large  amount  of cost for 
us, how? Because  of the involvement  of the feed requirements,  but it is somehow  good , even  
sometimes  what we do what  we should  do, before  providing  the food,  you just use a small  
stick  or something  if you have  a small  pond , and all. And or, if you have  some  way to help 
this fish to move  fast, and also anyway  it is a flow-through  system.  So definitely  the fish will swim  a lot. So, the moment  the moment  it will swim  a lot, what  will happen  it needs  a huge , a 
lot of fish feed as well.   
So, but the good  thing  about  this is like it is, it will be complet ely it will be consumed  more  in 
much  higher  percentage  than then in the other  intensive  aquaculture  systems  or then in the 
other  extensive  aquaculture  or semi  intensive  aquaculture  systems,  because  it is keep  on 
running  it is keep  on moving  from  one place  to another . And it gives  them  a huge  amount  of 
how to say like, like the conversion , biomass  conversion  this feed to conversion  biomass  
conversion  ratio is very high in this kind of systems  because  of that, so, the production  yield  
will be higher , however  the consumption  of feed which  cause  you some  additional  econo mic 
involvement  and all.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:13)  
 
In general,  the flow-through  systems  are a type of intensive  land-based  aquaculture , this 
system  is characterized  as by requirement  of abunda nt continuous  water  flow, major  
disadvantage  involves  because  like it involves  requirement  of high volume  of water  and the 
absence  of self-cleaning  ability , and as we discussed  the feed, that is these  are the only like 
the cons part of this kind of system.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:33)   
So, what  will be the takeaway  message  for the today's  lecture , that flow-through  systems  in 
general  involve s with a certain  like it is a an intensive  land-based  aquaculture  systems , which  
involves  with a continuous  flow of water in your system , in the unit. It requires  abundant  
amount  of continuous  water  flow, the water  will be keep  on flowing.  It facilitates  the higher  
production  than the traditional  pond,  I already  discuss  with you to discuss  with you what  is 
the reason  behin d it what  is the scientific  funda behind  it.  
And they posses s the cleaning  difficulties  and lacks the self-cleaning  ability , scientists  are 
working  on it, they have  developed  different  kinds  of self-cleaning  raceway  ponds  nowadays  
as well. So, where  the treatment  unit so, there  is like, proper  type proper  sacking  mechanisms  
which  are there  those  sacks  are there  which  will clean  keep  on cleaning  with time it will keep  
on cleaning  the bottom  of those  flow-through  systems  and all. So, by this way you can clean 
the systems , you can clean  the bottom  and with time and not only that, if it is a very really  
huge .  
So, what  they do with time to time they the moment  they do the harvesting , the amount  of 
harvesting  say like once  in a year or twice  a year depending  upon the cultur e species.  So, 
once  the harvesting  is done,  then they keep  on flow, they increase  the flow rate. So, once  they 
increase  the flow rate, and somehow  make  certain  barricator,  certain  restriction  at certain  
point , what  will happen ?  
There all the solids  will keep  on accumulating , then they will go for grazin g process , and they 
collect  all the like the suspended  solid, all the sediment ed particles  which  is there  in, which  
are there  in the this kind of like system , this flow-through  systems  and all. So, this is how it is done , and this is the technology  that is available  nowadays  in the market  already.  So, I hope  
you get to know  some  new thing s in today's  lecture .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  26:45)  
 
And these  are the references  that I have  taken  the data from  so you can go through  it, and if 
you have  any difficulties  definitely  during  the live session  you can discuss  with me. Thank  
you so much.  See you in the next lecture  video.   