 Advanced Aquaculture Technology   
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian  Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture: 04  
Propagation Water Budget  
Hello, everyone, welcome to the course Advanced Aquaculture Technology  for the fourth lecture 
of M odule 1, which is the propagation and water budget.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:36)  
 
So, in this module, we have already learned about the basic aquaculture some basic aquacultur e 
things. And now we will  go ahead with the  Propagation of fishes, Water budget, Water accounting, 
and the W ater footprint of aquaculture systems and management's.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:52)  
 
The first thing that we need to know about the propagation is that the breeding or the propagation 
it’s only an act of producing the young ones from the parent brood f ishes. So, in aquaculture the 
fish breeding , it is very important because in order to ensure that the availability of fingerlings are 
there for the stocking of ponds, pens, tanks, cages, or any aquaculture facilities that you are  
developing in your system or aquaculture farm  that you are  targeting.  
It also ensures the species continuity and the survival and specifically like whatever the target 
culture species that you are, farming in your aquac ulture farm. So , in order to have it in ample 
amount , and to go ahead with the year -long production and also the continuous production on the 
same, you need to have this propagation  unit to develop the propagation methods, or you need to 
go ahead  with the natural artificial, I will go I wi ll discuss about it in details in the later slides.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:52)  
 
In general, the methods of propagation it depends on different factors. So, there are different 
methods of propagation but the selection of method it entirely depends on the fish species that you 
are culturing or the targets of culture species, it can be fish, it can many other aquaculture species,  
local environmental conditions.  
The facilities that are available in the l ocal vicinity, and if the methods of this propagation 
according based on this different criteria’s  it can be divided into three categories, the first one is 
the Natural propagation, second one is the Semi -natural propagation and the third one is the 
Artifi cial propagation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:37)  
 
What is natural propagation actually, in natural propagation, you know, like we try to manipulate 
the natural conditions?  And in the natural conditions, we try to go ahead with the propagation of 
the breeding  of the culture species or the culture, whatever the target species that we are targeting 
in our farm.  
So, in general, say I a m giving you some examples in case of African catfish  or the C larias, what 
we do we try to increase the inflow of new water or th e freshwater availability in the pond or in 
your tank, and sudden rise in that this pond water level, it helps the African catfish, to go for 
breeding it i s in a particular breeding season.  
In case of common carp, what we do we try to incorporate more amo unt of grassy vegetations in 
the pond bottom or the slope. S o, that it will act as a n egg  collecting nest for the common carp, we 
can go ahead with the artificial nest we can inculcate or incorporate the artificial nest in case of 
American and European cat fishes like the Ictalurus  or the Silurus.  So, in these kinds of fishes  in 
these kinds of species , this presence of this artificial nest actually very much helpful so that they 
can go or the brooder fish they can go for the propagation  procedure  there in the nest itself.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:10)  
 
The second type which is a Semi -natural one, the semi natural one is the one where it i s not we are 
not completely depending upon the natural procedures rather we try to incorporate some additional 
artificial methods. So , not entirely the arti ficial propagation ones but it i s like semi one. So, in 
these particular cases , what we do we try to first inject the female fish with a pituitary gland extract.  
So, which definitely triggers the spawning activi ty in them and then what happens this spawners 
or this breeders then after this gland  injection after the injection of this pituitary gland  extract, we 
take it out of the school and we put it in the small grassy pond or say like an enclosure where the 
spaw ning text place as  we call this spawning tank as well.   
So, we try to prepare it prepare the land or the breeding area before head , it can be based on your 
construction  based on the space availability based on the type of species the breeding specie , the 
type of t he brooder fish that you a re culturing, that you will be culturing there. So, based on that, 
you have to design it accordingly.  
And all this discussion about the design and consideration like engineering consideration, we will  
be discussing even maybe in the later lectures. So, at this stage, you just need to know that 
enclosure has to be sufficient enough for the breeders or the spawners to survive in a very optimum 
environmental condition for them to go for a the proper spawning so this fertiliz ed eggs, which 
after the spawning is taking place.  
So, those are collected and they are reared under the improved conditions either naturally or 
artificially. So , this kind of propagation techniques, we call it semi -natural techniques. So , it is 
very much famous a and even in nowadays all over the world, but in order to go for the more 
intensive aquaculture system sometimes and also based on some the demand of the species, we 
have to go for the third and the last propagation  method that we are go ing to discuss is the artificial 
propagation  systems.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:21)  
 
In case of Artificial P ropagation, it can be divided or it can be like divided in like 6 stages, 6 
different stages, first, you have to go for the selection of the brooder f ish. So , you have to go to the 
school and you have to go to the school of fishes and you just try to find out the fish, the female 
fish with its optimum conditions .  
There are different criterias depending on the species that we need to think upon like the  before  
while choosing the brooder  fish, so that the best you know quality is kind of transferred to the 
offspri ng to their offspring. So, that i s why we try to have the best quality brooder fish and we 
select them there are selection criteria spawners  and the maturation of the brooders  is the first 
stage .  
Then this female spawners are injected usually in two phases, then the eggs and the sperms are 
hand stripped from this in during these particular methods , and these eggs are then artificially 
fertili zed and incubated in incubation, incubators and also the so , to have a proper, how to say like 
optimum condition for them to grow .  
And so that they will hatched  in the close supervision methods. So, these eggs  are like placed in a 
incubator as I already t old and so, that this kinds of incubators are actually not so costly, but you 
can have it in your farm and you can even develop it like you know from the local using the local 
technology also.  
So, these incubators  are used to maintain the proper temperatu re, that i s the first and foremost thing 
that temperature has to be maintained and also there are other incubation criterias as well which 
have to maintain . So, in order to have these eggs properly hatched in these incubators  in proper  
condition .  
Initial rearing  of the , these hatched larvae  is carried out in a controlled condition in a rearing  tank 
in a but then the soon after the fry starts, they start to feed they are transported to the proper rearing 
ponds . So, there are  initial rearing  ponds  and the final stage of rearing  ponds,  the initial reading 
ponds on the like pre -straining rearing ponds  those where we go for this initial rearing  of these 
hatched larvae  and then we go ahead with the further procedure in the final the larger size rearing  
ponds .  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:49)  
 
So, what are the advantages of this artificial propagation?  So, definitely the fish seed are available 
for all year round. So, because in the other cases you have to worry about the proper particular 
breeding seasons. S o, if it is there in like say, natural propagation or the semi -natural propagation.  
Then you have to worry about like its breeding season and this particular season only you can go 
ahead with the supplying the particular criteria so that they are they  will go and they will bid 
themselves but in case of artificial propagation , you do not  have to worry about that you it can be 
done here all year round.  
And will give you guaranteed how to set the yield  the all year-round  fish seed, which is obtained 
outside the natural environment of fish, it is sometimes well it i s unnecessarily if you can provide 
it with the optimum environmental condition it can be a very high-quality  seeds and your actually 
targeting the brooder fish,  which are the best brooder fish possible.  
So, in that case, what will happen the offspring  will be having the higher body mass ratios and 
there are different indexes which we try to target when we go for the brooder fish  selection of 
brooder  fish which h elps to have the offspring with the high quality and like according to our desire 
according to the market demand and all, it increases the survival rate of the fry rather than in the 
natural conditions there, they can be entrusted with the different diseas es they can be the feed for 
other predators.  
But in case of artificial propagation, we are trying to have it enclosed supervision methods. So, 
because of the close supervision, so we this price can have a very high survival rate compared to 
the natural ec osystem natural systems  and all , it improves the quality by crossing t wo different 
species which we call the hybridization.  
So, suppose we want to go for some hybridization of two different species , but it is not possible 
for it is a very much a difficult y in the natural conditions, especially the natural and the semi -
natural propagation  methods, but in this particular method, we can go ahead with the hybridization  
method, if you can provide, proper condition, proper environmental  condition and it is doabl e, and 
it also improves the quality of the hybridization processes  as well.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:08)  
 
Everything comes with the advantages and disadvantages, there are other side of it. So, artificial 
propagation  has also some cons part of it. So, specifically the what will happen the donor fish the 
brooder is that it has to be sacrificed in most of the cases the artificial propagation  method that we 
follow, it has to be sacrificed and hence the loss o f fish of co urse, but though it i s not in a huge 
number.  
So, it is doable, it is actually not t hat of a big have that big of a advantage. The  whole process is 
actually labo rious and also highly technical, you have to have a proper technical team ready with 
you and yo u have to have a proper expert who has all the ideas and expertise possible to go for 
this artificial propagation  methods otherwise it will not give you the proper results that you are  
actually  expecting from your system.  
It is actually expensive in natur e. Because you have to have a proper housing you have to have a 
proper the incubators you have to install the jars you have to install the construct the tanks and et  
cetera  and et  cetera  in a close circulatory systems and this because of the circulatory sy stem the 
water that you will be using there that has to be also re -circulating in nature.  
So, or at least the freshwater exchange has to be happen very frequently. So, all these things makes 
it a little bit expensive compared to the natural or the semi na tural one, but it can be neutralized by 
or even it can be definitely suppressed if you go for proper scientific methods and it will even give 
you additional fruits as well because if you go for the proper propagation methods, you will get 
proper good amoun t of off-stream  and this good amount of off-stream  will give you a good amount 
of economic benefits as well if you can, if you target proper scientific if you go for proper scientific 
approaches.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:00)  
 
The next topic that I will  be discussing about the water uses in fisheries and aquaculture. So, in 
general the water use by the fisheries  sectors can be  grouped into two categories In -stream or say 
like on -site water use and the second one is Off-stream  or like off-site waters  use. So, water 
consumptions it i s actually the proportion to the water which is accumulated into the products and 
the loss by the evaporation.  
So, because what does that mean it does mean like see the water in general fisheries sector  what 
are the sources of water, you use the natural streams, you use the sea water streams by the dike s 
say like tide fed farms  and all  and you can use the groundwater by using the pump and and all  
pumps and all so, you can use different means of, natural resources or even the artificial resources 
as well.  
So, those are the intake of your water use, I would say like the water which are intake in which 
your intak ing through your  systems are which are actually like  the water which are actually the 
source of that water that you are  actually utilizing your system, the what are  the consumption 
methods that the what are the  water consumption that actually involved with that, with this with 
our pond with our f arm, defini tely the first thing is the evaporation  right?  because the pond or the 
tank that you are  using, it has a high surface area.  
So, because of its high surface area, what happens because of the sunlight and because of the 
normal wind movement also, the water gate defuse  back to the water evaporates to the atmosphere. 
So, the water it i s keep on evaporating to the atmosphere, because of that, we call it the evaporation 
loss. So , this evaporation loss is now one of the major losses in the in any kind of ponds  and all 
this what are the other type of losses.  
It is like the freshwater exchange that you need to do. Why you need to do the freshwater exchange 
I have already discussed briefly when we discuss about the intensive aquaculture that because of 
the intensive  that when we go for semi intensive or intensive aquaculture, we need to treat the 
wastewater either we have to treat it or either we have to just simply throw it to the surface water 
bodies.  
Because it contains a huge amount of unwanted pollutants, which  does not  let the fish or the aquatic 
species that you a re targeting to l ive properly in your system. So, because of that, what we do we 
try to go for the freshwater exchange. So, to have a proper amount of less amount of pollutant in 
your pond or tank or also the higher amount of dissolved oxygen in your system. So, in order to 
do that, you get read of a lot amount of water from your systems.  
So, whic h also comes as a loss of water  the, these are the water  consumptions that we normally 
like these are the different parameters of the water consumption that we normally talked about.  
Other than that, there are losses like the seepage losses, so you know what is seepage losses, like 
in a suppose you have a pond, so you have, the pond  bottom, so there are a lot of water which get 
leached out of the system.  
So, it will go to the either go to the nearest surface water bodies, or it will go to the groundwater 
go and recharge the groundw ater. In one way it is good, it i s recharging the groundwater, it i s 
somehow getting collected to the river bodies and all but actually economic point of vi ew, we are 
actually losing huge amount of water  and water comes with the price ?  
Because in order to exchange that water, you need to go for the freshwater exchange, you have to 
go to the municipality,  if you a re from the rural sector, you have to go and i t comes with the cost because of the conduit system, the pipelines, the pump to let the water come to your systems or 
maybe if you want to build a canal that also comes with a certain amount of cost involvement and  
all.  
So, all these things are involved, which are actually the main sources of water use and water 
consumption in your farm or in your aquaculture ponds. So , in general, the in -stream water use is 
like water, which is not removed from a source and is immediately returned with a littl e and or 
like no alteration.  
It is called the in -stream water  use like fishing  cage or pen culture  and vertical  raceways and  all in 
general, these are the in-strea m water use you know  in-stream water use  means like in these kinds 
of cases, we are using the water which is not something that you are  applying to your systems not 
something that you are  having a say suppose what we do in case of cage culture or pen culture.  
In case of cage culture, we do it i n a it is a type of offshore mainly it i s a type of offshore 
aquaculture system, what does that mean? You go to the seaside , you go to the seaside from the 
bank say like  a couple of meters away a couple of kilometers away, you go and develop a cage 
like st ructure.  
So, in that cage like structure, you go for your target, culture your target species and all , and the 
target species is found inside the cage aquaculture systems, but there you are not utilizing your any 
you are  not putting any effort to introduc e the water into the systems or you are  not putting any 
effort to somehow neutralize the water losses from the system.  
So, this is called in -stream water use. So, because the water is not removed from its source, it i s 
immediately returned with a little a nd very almost no alteration. So, then the amount of water that 
is needed is the amount of water that is able to sustain the according ecosystems and preserve the 
fish habitat. So, in this kind of tech treat, this kind of aq uaculture systems we call it in -stream or 
on-site water use .  (Refer Slide Time: 18:46)  
 
The next thing is the off-stream  or the like the off-site water  use, in case of off-stream  water use 
what we do we the water which is getting removed from this sources  consequent reduction in the 
amount of available water left on -site. So, in order to fulfill the this reduction in the amount of 
available water we what we do we add some water we by means of freshwater exchange we add 
some water by means of treatment of t hat wastewater itself or there are other ways.  
So, this is called the off-stream  water use or the off-site water use systems what can be the 
examples differently you know it like pond, recirculating aquaculture systems horizontal raceways  
et cetra. So, wh ich requires the initial water withdrawal to fill the pond and continuing what are 
you withdrawal for maintenance of oxygenation temperature and then dissolved solids remove , 
waste removal as I already discussed .  
Oxygenation is one of the major factor for  this kind of off-stream  water use because you have to 
maintain a certain amount of dissolved oxygen for your culture species to survive and also you 
have to maintain the temperature also if suppose in the summertime the temperature go keep on 
keeps on inc reasing what you need to do you have to suppl y it with the cold fresh water .  
Otherwise what will happen that temperature that I told you like there are the aquaculture species 
they cannot survive even a very minimal amount of temperature differences, unless until it is there 
are specific species which can do that, but most of them they are not , so in that so that i s why we 
have to be very much cautious about the temperature dissolved temperature the pollutants and 
oxygen dissolved oxygen content of our  farm of our pond .  
So, this off-stream water use is usually it measures  in terms of the water volumes that is abstracted 
and consumed and return to the environment. So , based on that, we go for understanding measure 
the off-stream water uses or the off -site water uses of our farm or of our aquaculture  tank or 
aquaculture pond or whatever  it is.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:51)  
 
So, it is so one of the major thing that we need to know in this particular  in matter is like water  
accounting? What is water accounting? Suppose you have you like being a country like huge 
country like India, we have to think about the water accounting. The water accounting phenomena  
it is very typical for in our case, for a country like say Singapore.   
It is very easy. I a m giving you one a very nice example in case of Singapore even few years back 
also they were completely depending on the Malaysia they will completely depending on the 
Malaysia for the freshwater supply and  all I think it s Pecan  or river or something. So , anyway so 
but later on they started they were some issues and also then they Singapore started they do no t 
have any surface water resource.  
They almost they have null surface water resource. So , what they do they started having a treating 
the wastewater by themselves and they use that treated wastewater for the consumptions also, even 
for human consumption also, the whatever the water that is getting generated from the gray water 
or black water or  say like industrial wastewater.  
They try to treat it they have a very high standard. The high like amount of the proper regulations 
or rules or regulations by their regulatory bodies, their pollution control boards and also, they 
properly  maintain the treatment criteria and all then they revert it back to the day they again use it 
back to the, to its source or to its like, for the human consumptions and again for the other purposes 
like irrigation or the household, all the other necessary uses  and all .  
So, for human consumptions definitel y they go for the maximum amount of treatment, the best 
quality treatment they want to go ahead with like primary, secondary, tertiary treatment, all the 
treatment procedures possible. I wi ll discuss about these things in later slides say how what are the 
different treatment procedures like primary and secondary treatment, tertiary treatment, which are 
involved with the wastewater treatment technology.  
So, what they do they do this kind of thing. So, in there for them, the water accounting is a very 
import ant tool to monitor and evaluate the source of water resources and how they a re utilizing 
them and how it can be minimized further like the losses in water, the consumption  in water, so, 
how they can minimize this part.  
So, you have to know this  water  accounting , it gives us a measure it provides us a measure of 
availability of water resources within a country, it can be used to improve the resource management 
as I told you, by means of developing idea developing structure or infrastructure for proper 
mana gement of the water that is already available in your country or the water that is supplied or 
imported from other countries .  
And how you can properly utilize it so that you the minimum amount of loss can be happened and 
maximum amount of economic benefit s or the economic loss you can add in particular financial 
year also . The aquaculture can have both in -stream and off -stream water use according to the 
aquaculture methods  that we are utilizing in our fo rm.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:06)  
 
So, in general water in when we go for this water stock in water accounting, so, what are the 
methods, this is very easy this you guys already know I think so, the first thing is like the total 
addition of water, total additional water addition of water it  contains the precipitation, the water 
inflow because of the from the nearby regions,  and the  return.  
What do I mean by the nearby regions it can be from the surface water which is available there or 
the groundwater inflow of groundwater i ncharge , it can be the return  water or the return wastewater 
from the treatment of the wastewater treatment on the wastewater that is being generated or maybe 
the fresh during the procedure during the procedure itself, we find some there are some fresh water 
availability in that procedure in the treatment plant itself.  
So, even before the completion of the treatment, you can also return it back to the , to your system 
to incorporate some amount of say like for nutrition requirement or for normal usage or the water 
quality is good enough. So, you just return it back to your system to return back to your farm  total 
reduction first of all the Evapotranspiration what do I mean by the Evapotranspiration?  
You know w hat is Evaporation? A nd you also know what is transpiration?  Transpiration  is the 
loss of water that has been happening because of the plant leaves  because through the plant leaves 
the amount of water that is getting transpirated , we call it this process we call it transpiration  
process. So, Evapotranspi rtation is like  a mutual process, because of the presence of the different 
aquatic trees and the trees which are there in your farm.  
So, the losses occurred because of the losses incurred because of the presence of those aquatic 
trees or the normal or the land trees and  the evaporation losses because of your farm pond and all. 
So, all these together we call it the losses occurred because of the evapotranspiration , outflow to 
nearby regions , because of the difference is like in the slope the gradient and all .  
So, what ha ppens sometimes the some  amount of water is getting lost or sometimes they can be 
somehow leached out of the system. So, that is the outflow to the nearby regions, the outflow to 
the sea, because of the as I told you already, it i s because of the change in  this gradient or the 
change in slope and because of the other parameters the water get, it gets somehow we lost some 
amount of water to the sea or to the ground water to the ground itself.  
So, an abstraction so these are the different processes abstraction is also involved with this kind of 
leaching phenomenon. So , the all this together is the reduction that occurs during the , which 
accounts this accounts to all this water losses and all this i n when we go for the water accounting  
and all .  
So, all together stock at the end of the accounting period is what is the stock at the beginning of 
accounting period plus the total addition minus total reduction and plus minus variation in the 
water stocks . So, all together if we can go ahead with this kind of calculations, we can find out the 
total stock at the end of the accounting period and that value can be easily calculated.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:31)  
 
So, what are the direct or indirect water consum ptions, the direct water consumptions for the fish 
cultures. And also, the evaporation  which actually costs for the water loss for indirect water 
consumptions in terms of water accumulated inputs used in the aquaculture and the water lost. 
Indirect water consumptions  during the water loss is the production process of the inputs.  
So, like the fish feed, we do not  talk about it, we do not  talk about the total amount of water 
requirement in the aquaculture we only talk about the water which is in a view you can see it , the 
visible water losses, what about the fish  feed? What about the materials that you are  utilizing 
whatever the water that is required to like, establish or to prepare or to procure that particular 
material.  
When you go for the lifecycle anal ysis of a particular of your farm of your final product, it also 
involves all this water losses, passive water loss as well also, so recently, we started talking about 
this, you started discussing about this, a nd it i s a very major factor and we need to th ink about it 
this passive water losses  and all , it is a major water loss.  
It is something like , it is like, we call it some amount of some type of technologies, which are very 
much energy efficient or energy sufficient and all but at the end of the day, if you calculate their 
lifecycle, if you calculate properly, what is the total amount of energy, it ac tually requires, like not 
the direct energy, not the direct energy consumption.  
So, if some type of renewable energy has direct energy consumption, which like , when you use 
those energy, the direct energy consumption is very less, but actually, the actual  loss of energy 
which occurs due to the production of that particular product, we try, we sometimes avoid that, it 
is not a good practice, you have to go ahead with that calculations as well.  
You have to go ahead with incorporate those losses those energy  consumption process as well to 
make that production to make that raw material which makes that further process easier or less 
energy consumable or less in a more energy efficient or select less water use and all so, whatever 
all this process actually invo lves.  
So, you have to abide by t hese things , whenever you calculate the total water incorporation in your 
system, you have to incorporate the what production process water incorporated already in your production process of the inputs say like feed and all , that also should be incorporated . When we 
go for this water stocking.   
The water consumption in case of capture fisheries, definitely there is no sign ificant water 
consumption that i s the good thing about it. But in case of aquaculture depending upon the  
aquaculture methods, the location of the facilities or the farms that you have the use and the 
formulation of the aquaculture feeds  as I already mentioned. S o, this is also that is very important 
and the corresponding area of cultivated crop field. So, al l these things are very much important 
when we go ahead with the consumption of the water we calculating those things in your systems.  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:57)  
 
So, these are the values that we need to remember, when we go for the water footprint analys is 
water footprint it includes generally the four components. The first of all water that evaporates 
water that incorporated into the product, water that is not returned to the same area where it was 
withdrawn and the water that is needed to dilute the pol lutant concentration to water quality 
standards to maintain the water quality standards given by the local authorities .  
Say in case of Indian perspective, its central pollution control board or than the this Namami Gange  
they have. So, they have this Nama mi Gange  mission. So, they have also started having their own 
rules  and regulation  that is mandatory for all the grocery polluting industries to follow, when they 
will discharge their wastewater to the Ganga to the Ganga basins  and all . So, these are the d ifferent 
regulatory bodies that we have to these rules and regulations by this regulatory  bodies that we have 
to abide .  
That and because of that, we need to provide some additional add some additional amount of water 
to dilute the pollutant concentration before putting into the surface water body or before releasing 
into the surface water body. In general water consumptions only account, the water that evaporates 
and the water that incorporated into the products. We do no t talk about the water which is coming, 
which is not returned back to its source or water that we actually add additionally to dilute the 
pollutant concentration in the water quality, so, that is not incorporated in the  water consumptions 
calculations.  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:33)  
 
But water footprint in corporate every other details of this water footprint and  all water  
incorporated in the system and all. C onsidering the decrease in the water quality and it actually 
this water footprint is good, why we shou ld go ahead with the water footprint analysis  and all , 
because it considers that decrease in the water quality that is the consumption and also the water 
quality like, water quantity first of all, that is the consumption and also the water quality, the 
pollution .  
So, both of these is actually in involved in the analysis of the water footprint , it also can give you 
the access to the both water use within the country like internal water footprint and also the water 
use, because of the incorporation of the ot her countries mostl y the neighboring countries, it i s very 
often we actually export it import it from other countries like, other than the neighboring countries 
is very few examples are there in the Middle East country, t hey do it also.  
So, for them it i s a external water footprint. It distinguishes between the three types of freshwater 
consumptions the blue water that is the surface and the groundwater, the green water that is the 
rainwater or the precipitation and the grey water which is like the pollute d water. So, water 
footprint gives us a overall view of the all the water and where all the water is involved and how 
it is directly or indirectly involved and what are the consumption pattern what are the water uses 
criteria what are the water recirculati on that is happening inside the system and all .  
(Refer Slide Time: 34:14)  
 
So, I have taken these references to prepare this particular lecture material. So, thank you so much. 
So, I think you have had a nice idea about the different water consumption cr iteria what is water 
footprint and what , is the water cycle that is involved in the aquaculture systems  and all . Thank 
you so much . 
 
 
