Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture - 02  
Topic - Aquaculture Systems and Input Factors  
Hello everyone. Welcome to the second lect ure series of module 1, Introduction to 
Aquaculture. My name is Professor Go urav Dhar Bhowmick , from the Department of 
Agriculture and Food engineering , IIT Kharagpur. In continuation with the discussions that 
we ha d in the last lecture, I wi ll share here , I will share the aquaculture systems and the input 
factors in this particular lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:56)  
 
So, what are the concepts that I will  be covering in this particular lecture is the types of 
aquaculture systems , what is polyculture, w hat are the signifi cance of feeding in aquaculture, 
and what are the types of feeds that we norm ally use in aquaculture systems?   (Refer Slide Time:  1:15)  
 
So, in ge neral, the aquaculture systems classic is like it i s the systems are classified into 3 
broad categories. The first one i s extensive, the second is semi -intensive, and the third one is 
the intensive aquaculture . So,  what is this extensive, semi -intensive and intensive 
aquaculture ? I will show you in later slides.  
Other than that, the intensity of this aquaculture that we are talking about based on which this 
these broad catego ries are being classified, they a re actually based on the inputs required for 
farming . First of all, the fish stocking density, second is the amount of feed that you need to 
provide with the time for that specific culture spaces or whatever  the number of species that 
you a re culturing there, t he level of manipulation of natural factor. These three basic inputs 
are actually very much responsible for the classification of these 3broad category of 
aquaculture systems .  (Refer Slide Time:  2:24)  
 
So, the first one is the extensive aquaculture . If you must have seen like we earlier days 
people used to do the aquaculture , even  in the developing countries nowadays also like in 
India a lso we normally do it the aquaculture in a large pond or the large lake where we , not 
large lake , a small lake and the large ponds and all way we normally provide try to provide 
the seed in the system , introduced to see d into the system. And what happens b ecaus e it i s 
extensive size, because of all the natural benefits that is available in the system, because of 
the very low stocking density that the all the cultural species that we are introducing, they 
have.  
Because of all this reason what happened, this  extens ive ecosystem doesn’t need much of an  
anthropogenic activity, we do no t need to involve much and very minimal inputs are needed 
for maintaining the this features go growth or the Aquatic  species growth and the survival. 
Basically, the all the in cas e of extensive aquaculture systems, very basic organic fertilizers 
use time to time if even if it is most of the cases is not needed. When even if it is used, it i s 
only the animal or the plant wasted, we simply just throw  it into the water body. We don’t  
need any additional aeration, feeding , nothing because the  aeration and feeding these are the 
major economical factor that involves with the aqua culture economics, which we do no t have 
to worry about in case of extensive aquaculture .  
It has a very low st ocking density as I already told generally les s than 500 kg per hectare, you 
know hectare 10,000 square meter . So,  other than that, the natural productivity of the feed 
like the plants and animals within the system is actually used for the whatever the cul ture 
species that you a re producin g there or culturing there. An other important thing i s the as I already told the aeration  is not needed because the natural gas exchange is happening . From 
the atmosphere whatever the dissolved oxygen that is required for the culture species to 
survive in your system , in your aquaculture  extensive aquaculture systems, it s ample enough . 
So, in general, we do not have to go for this additional aeration cost and addition aerator 
installation i n this kind of extensive aquacultu re systems . They are normally used for pond 
forming , bivalve  and seaweed farming in general.  
(Refer Slide Time:  5:07)  
 
The second is the semi -intensive aquaculture . In this particular type of system, it is not 
extensive like it is not completely rely on the natural productivity and supplementation, but it 
rely up to an extent on natural productivity and supplementation and additional feeding or 
additional aeration is provided only if it needs .  
So, in that p articular case, we call it semi -intensive aquacu lture systems . So,  there are 
provisions that you have to ready with , so that you can provide the aeration, you can start the 
aeration to think like the your culture species is struggling with the available oxygen. Or you 
can just provide the aeration time to time basis to maintain the dissolved oxygen level of your 
tank or of your culture unit.  
Addition of inorganic or organic fertilizers to improve the natural productivity , addition of 
prepared food, it is called supplemental feeding, it  is not that is ve ry much necessary and you 
have to provide each and every day, it can be very, the duration for alternative feeding can be 
very high. You can even not do that. If you think like if you your aquaculture system  has 
ample amount of natural fee ds available for its survival. It is almost exclusive to p onds and it allows for an increase in t he stocking density within the pond . So, it is not something that we 
normally target in the tank or the raceway systems.  
(Refer Slide Time:  6:45) 
 
The third and the most prod uctive one and also in ways it was one of the notorious one at one 
point of time, but now with thanks to the advancement in the technology, now, we have 
cracked that the problem that the major issues that we were facing with this intensive 
aquaculture . This is actually completely contrast to the natural systems , it has a very simple 
you know a food chain , you provide food, then only your culture spaces will survive then 
otherwise not . So, there is no hierarchy in the food chain in this particular type of aq uaculture 
systems.  
It can be these intensive systems  may be in the ponds example shrimp in the tropical and 
subtropical regions, cages in the marine fish farming , the raceways. In the temperate regions, 
they go for trout species , culturing of the trout spaces, they do it in the this intensive  
aquaculture systems . In the  tanks , in Japan, they produce eels in the tanks so that also this 
production of eel is actually they producing in the intensive aquaculture facilities. All the 
nutrition in this farm stock,  it is actually comes from the introduced feed and no utilization of 
natural diet is at all present in this kind of aquaculture systems.  
Very high stocking densities are practiced with a very higher productivity and yield. 
However, it comes with a lot of additional issues , lot of ad ditional economic environment, s o, 
that I wi ll be discussing later slides . So,  in general, if you compare, like the intensive 
aquaculture in pond , intensive aquaculture in cage or intensive aquaculture in raceway or tanks, the stocking densities are lowest in pond, followed by cages and then the high est in the 
raceways and tanks b ecause in raceways and tanks, we have , how to say , more of a flexibility 
to control the environment to control to make optimal situation for your target  species t o 
survive h ere.  
So, once you have that control in your system in your, for your target species to survi ve in 
your system, then it that i s why the stocking densities are very high in this case of in this ca se 
is like raceways and tanks w hereas in  case of ponds it i s very low.  
(Refer Slide Time:  9:05)  
 
As I discussed the characteristics of intensive aquaculture the very a basic one is like it has a 
very simple food chain just prepare food , supply it,  your organism w ill survive otherwise, 
they do not have any other source to other source of food in your systems because your 
culture density is very high , stocking density is very high. If you want to have a good amount 
of production, you have to go ahead with the preparation of proper amount of food and 
supply that particular feed to your cultured organisms time to time and you have to take care 
of that feed demand for your culture organism ecosystem.  
In general, the low energy losses from the feed input with high food conversion rati o from 
specified  artificial fee ds can be ach ieved  in this kind  of, in this kind of culture systems. What 
does that mean? Suppose you go for extensive aquaculture or say s emi intensive aquaculture 
systems , in extensive we do not want to, you a re not going to put any fee d. But in case of 
semi inte nsive you can put feed , you can put feed time to time supplemental feed if it 
requires, but whereas you a re not you cannot be sure about the food or  the feeds or the feed that you a re providing . The nutritional , the benefits that it  has, whether it is actually transfer  
to the person who is consuming that fish or not, what does that mean?  
And also, like see, first of all the fish it has to consume that feed so that that fish that is food 
conversion rati o has to be very high that fish , that food has to provide ample amount of 
nutrition for that fish. And then there comes another type of food conversion ratio that we 
considere d that is not the thing that we a re talking about here.  
But in that case, we also talking about the how that bi omass that is present in the fish are 
actually being utilized when we assimilate that organism , assimilate that particular culture 
species or not. Anyway, so, in this particular case, what we are talking about the food 
conversion ratio of feed to the fish biomass or  to the culture species biomass . Okay,  So, 
because of this specialized artificial feeds, this ratio can be very high.  
Earlier days, like you know a aa like people use natura  l even the seaweeds earlier they use , 
the normal seaweeds, they simply put it into the system and then try to do to , make it  make it 
used as feed for some type of some particular type of species aquatic species . Later on, they 
find out like why to utilize the seaweed , let u s go for , they dry it, they make a proper feed out 
of it, they make it in such a way that the ultimate product is very, like they can consume it 
much better. They this conversion ratio for their ultimate biomass is like in a fish biomass is 
very high if you can make it in a specialized way. And then you supp ly it for as feed.  
So, it is just an example that I a m giving like, so, these kind of scenarios are we wer e facing 
earlier days, but now , still research is going on to make it make this fish feed in this in a 
proper proportionate way so that it can be hig hly beneficial for the target species that you a re 
culturing in your system .  
So, in case of intensive aquaculture, no re cycling of energy at all and it i s totally non-self 
supporting, what does that mean? It completely depends on the higher high input of energy 
that you a re providing to the system, because see , is just a normal stagnant water body or say 
like a running water body, but there are some cultural species that say , they do not have any 
other resources to utilize.  
So, where from  they get this re sources. Artificial means by means of anthropogenic activity 
like we do, we provide them feed , we provide them aeration, so that the dissolve  oxygen level 
will be higher, we provide them with the filtration techniques, so that the whatever the 
wastewater t hat is generating from that system can be filtered .  So, this filtration system also you have to provide because unless until you filter the water 
and you use it the aquaculture species they will be in stress , first of all, they will be in 
stressed for tim e because they cannot sustain more ammonia cal, nitrogen or any nitrogen 
species present in the aquaculture pond or aquaculture tank or else whatever you a re using.  
So, they will be in stress , first of all,  second , they will die . At the end if it goes up t o a certain 
extent they will die . So, filtration rate is one of the major factor that plays a major role here in 
aquaculture sectors. Otherwise, what you have to do , you have to get rid of the water , you 
have to go for fresh water exchange and which comes with a lot of price. Because you cannot 
fresh water does have a huge price now adays because fresh water does no t come easily . So,  
especially , if you talk about the rural urban areas if you want to have your own farm 
aquaculture farm in say like near in urb an or say like  semi urban areas , the water cost is very 
high.  
So, you cannot just think of doing all this aquaculture activities aquaculture sector 
development unless until you come up with some adverse solutions . So, I will discuss about 
all those soluti ons in later a days I mean later lectures, where I wi ll show you like what are  
the advanced technology that is developing by the scientists all over the world to treat that to 
improve this filtration units and to treat that wastewater .  
So, that is freshwa ter exchange consumption is very, like it comes down to almost 0 
nowadays. There are pumping because definitely like when the fresh exchange  is there, there 
must be somewhere the sources and you have to use the power to get the w ater from that 
source and t o utilize it in your aquaculture tank .  
So, what is the major advantage,  why still people are looking for this intensive aquaculture 
system is the high yield . It has a very high yield per unit area or unit volume of the 
aquaculture tank that your aquacultu re tank or the rest with that your aquaculture  or pond that 
you a re utilizing .  
So, because of this high yield, it comes with a very high economic benefits as well . So, once 
it comes with benefits, it can easily surpass all the requirement all the economic  requirement 
that it has the inputs that it has for the energy or for the supply chain  and all . So, it can easily , 
we can easily  a you know  neutralize this demand and not only neutralize we can somehow 
improve the amount of yield and we can get economic be nefit out of this kind of system s.  (Refer Slide Time:  15:50 ) 
 
The next thing that I want to discuss about  the polyculture I think we do no t go for single 
culture anymore, because in order to utilize the whole pond system, because see, first of all, 
there are different type of aquatic species, they have different zone of dwelling. W hat they 
do, like there are a couple , there are types of fishes who prefer s to stay in the surface of  the 
water body.  
And they only go for this larva’s,  they go for this the p hytoplankto ns and all. T here are some 
there are they can be even piscivorous as well. But there are some type of fissures or equity 
species they normally try to dwell on the column or the middle zone we call it, we call it 
column dwellers.  
Okey So, in the  column dwellers are there who try to stay not in the surface, not on the 
bottom, but more in the middle area, like the column area we call it. Then there come the 
benthic zone where, which is like almost on the bottom of the tank or the pond, where there 
are some dwellers who love to stay there and love to have feed  by the all the,  they normally 
there in the benthic zone  only.  
So, if you go for a culture system, if you go for developing a farm, aquaculture farm, you 
definitely wan t to utilize all these se ctors , you do not  want to go for culturing a species which 
will only stay in the top whereas you can increase the productivity , increase the yield, if you 
can start doing two , three culture species culturing toget her and let them have their feed  they 
will not interact with each other’ s feeding  like habitats and they do not  go for , there will be 
no confli cting feed for this kind of speci es.  Not only that there are fishes who loves to have phytoplankton , who loves to have 
zooplankton, some of them likes to h ave the aquatic insects, some of them likes to have the 
aquatic organisms or the detritus in the benthic regio n, some of them like are only herbivores, 
they only likes  to have the according vegetarians present in the in your culture system .  
So, based on t his, all these requirements, all this, you would just go before you target your 
culture spaces, yo u try to understand their habit , you try to understand their food ha bit, you 
try to understand what they prefers , where they prefers to stay, what kind of wat er, what kind 
of like a food requirement that they have, based on that you go for a deliberate farming 
practice, where you i ncrease the yield like anything.   
In a same water body, go for polyculture , increase the yield of the same water body that you 
are using earlier time, by just utilizing a proper science, you use the science, you change the 
you utilize the more amount of speci es in your system and make a maximum yield out of it . 
So, that i s how this polyculture works .  
(Refer Slide Time:  19:05)  
 
So, next thing is the feeding. Why feeding is important like in specially in case of extensive 
aquaculture, we do not  have to worry about it because it is naturally being  taken care of. In 
case of semi -intensive and intensive aquaculture we have to take care of the feed . So, first of 
all, if you want to have a high-quality  produce , healthy produce, you have to have a good 
quality feed we have to supply them with a good quality, simple  enough. G ood nutrition in 
the animal production systems is very much essential for the proper economic production of a 
healthy  and high quality production or  the yield  for your system, it i s very well known fact.  Second thing is like this nutrition is critical because this feed the amount of the cost involved 
with this feed actually  it accounts for approximate ly 50 percent  of the variable production 
cost of a any farming systems . So,  unless until you have a proper nutritional balance you 
maintain in your feed , unless until you have cheap systems available like low cost, but 
sustainab le systems available for production of the feed or at l east the supply of the feed in a 
system , it can cost you a lot , it can cost not only cost you a lot , it can it involved with 
everything , good amount of it gives you good production, good economic benef it also .  
So, it is not always that you can go for cheap food and cheap low-cost code a nd low-cost 
nutritional input if you  give to your fish, it will also give you the low income , it will also give 
you the low yield  and which comes out as not beneficiary at all . So, this is a very important . 
Fish nutrition it advanced dramatically in the recent years in the last couple of decades  and it 
now the new balanced  commercial diets are available which can promote optimal fish growth 
and optimal health all over the  world .  
(Refer Slide Time:  21:05)  
 
So, let us talk about the type of feeds that is available . So, normally, there are three types of 
food used in fishponds, natural , supplementary and complete feed. W hat is natural  feeds? S o, 
natural feed s, it includes t he detritus which normally stays in the bottom of your tank or on 
whatever it is . Bacteria, it can be suspended one , it can be attached  growth walls, whatever it 
is. There are plankto ns, it can be phytoplankton , it can be zooplankton , worms, insects, snail s, 
aquatic plants, fish, etcetera , etcetera. Why I a m talking about fish as a natural feed  because 
fish can be feed for their higher chain features as well or other higher chain aquatics species 
as well . So, they can also be a feed , they are also a na tural feed in aquatic systems.  Their abundance greatly dependent d epends on the water quality. It i s definitely becaus e 
suppose in case of natural feed  when we are talking about if suppose you are having a 
offshore culture or say if you are having a cage cult ure in a brackish water, where it i s like 
river mouth, where  river  is or the estuary region, where the river is actually reach ing the sea. 
In that region, it is very rich in nutrient , different nu trient , why what is the reason because it 
is coming down all t he way from the mountain and washes out all the possible things from 
the villages, cities or whichever it passes.  
So, at the end, when it reaches the sea, at that poor moment at that river mount, they have a 
huge amount of nutrition is present there. And this huge amount of nutrition s, nutrition 
actually d emands like it actually that it i s beneficial for the four different types of varieties  of 
aquatic species, you can see the y dwell there because they love to have the abundance of food 
is already availabl e. So,  it depends on the water quality and d epends upon the place where 
you a re culturing your things.  
First of all, if your water quality of your culture species suppose like if you a re having a same 
pen culture, same cage culture in a same brackish wate r, but it is coming from the wastewater 
it is coming it is having it is near to a mouth river mouth where the wastewater from the local 
municipality or the local industry is actually pouring .  
So, that wastewater has say like different kinds of xenobiotics , different kind of unwanted 
endocrine disrupting chemicals and all , what will happen , these chemicals  will affect your 
yield because definitely your cage culture whatever the species that you  are targeting  there, it 
will not survive here, it cannot surviv e there because of the higher amount of the pollutants 
that it receives . So, natural traits is it depends on the water quality as well.  
In case of supplementary feed, we normally provided to whom in case of semi extensive , 
semi -intensive . In case of semi -intensive , what we do , we provide it with terrestrial plants , 
kitchen  waste , agricultural byproducts. But make sure it does not  contain any chemical 
fertilizer or chemical pesticides.  Whatever the byproducts I a m talking about it should be 
organic in natur e supply to the to your tank or to your aquaculture production, it will be very 
much healthy it will make a very healthy ecosystem in there in your pond.  
The third thing is called the , it comes to complete feeds.  Complete feeds are the one which 
you have to have in case of intensive aquaculture systems you have to it should be it normally made from a mixture of carefully selected ingredients to provide all the nutrients necessary 
for your aquatic species t o grow properly healthy and well .  
So, this is actu ally target specific , target species specific , why I say target species specific , 
suppose you  are cultu ring say like  bivalve  for bivalve you do not  have to worry about f eed at 
all not much , say you are  culturing  any others other than fish you are  culturing  some say like 
any small fishes and all .  
So, when you a re culturing any small fishes and all , you have they have a very higher feed 
requirement , okay, but their feed has to be has the size which is good enough for them to 
swallow or for them to utilize th em to have it . You cannot have a system or you cannot have 
a fish feed , you cannot have a fish feed which is not sufficient enough which is not you do 
not have the ingredients which are good enough for them to have it and unless until they will 
have it the y will die and definitely it does not  make sense to provide this kind of  thing . So,  
this must be taken in the form so that the fish is they find it easy to eat and digest and difficult 
to make and the form and in sometimes quite extensive quite expensive i n general this .  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:00)  
 
As I discuss about this natural food production. In general,  natural f ish foods present in the 
fish pond are very diverse usually consist of a complex mixture of plants and animals, they 
range from the microscop ic to the relatively larger size . Fertilizer of ponds, we normally go 
for this fertiliza tion sometimes time to time, it i s not something that we are introducing a feed  
or introducing a fish feed to the system . We are actually trying to fertilize the system . So, by means of fertilizers like it i s like sometimes we introduced some iron-based  compounds . So, 
what it will do ? It will help to grow the phytoplankton in the system .  
So, once it will help to grow the phytoplankton in the system, it will definitely h elpful for the 
all the phytoplankton loving an aquatic species or say like zoo plantains which are actually in 
the higher tropic in the supply chain , sorry, in the food chain, then accordingly the whole 
system will evolve , whole system will be beneficial o ut of it . So,  that is why sometimes we 
can provide the fertilization we provide this to boost the biological cover in the  ponds.  
(Refer Slide Time:  27:12)  
 
The second thing is supplemen tary that I already told you it i s like it is incomplete or the 
partial diet which are intended only to help to support the natural food which  is already 
available in the pond  and so that th e fish will not f eel in stress that they do not  have ample 
amount of food available for them to survive . It fortify the normally fortif ies the naturally 
available diet with extra protein carbohydrate and all lipids . When to use supplementary 
plates , when you see that it becomes an insufficient it is the  natural foods are insufficient at 
that particular moment of time to ensure proper fish  growth or proper aquatic species growth .  
At that moment, you have to take care of it and you just go for supplementary just you just 
need to supply it , there are you have to do it continuous moni tor continuously monitor your 
farm and you have to make sur e that fishes  are not in stress and if it is then provide them with 
a natural foods. W hen the stocking density is very high and the good growth is requires at 
that moment of time also you have to provide them with a supplementary  feed. So,  suppose 
you have  a very specific amount of say like 100 kg per unit area, you have a production and all of a sudden you think of having like due to market demand you increase it to the 200 kg or 
select 300 kg per unit area of the pond or the tank or raceway that you have . When you try to 
increase it to these two or three times , you have to supply it with these supplementary feeds .  
(Refer Slide Time:  28:45)  
 
What are the desired properties of the supplementary feed ? It has to have a high protein 
carbohydrate content , very low fiber content, it should be around availability should be there 
with minimal additional cost for transport handling and processing. It shou ld be cheap in 
price for given f ood quality and low er the cost is better obviously like  for the , from the 
econom ic point of view. It should be well accepted by the fish , you plan to feed  because for 
them it is a sudden feed, it is like they a re faced all of a sudden you providing them with a 
new food and all.  
But if you suppose who does not  like that particular typ e of food, if y ou supply them, they 
will like no, I a m not going to have it like they will not find it cause and they will not find 
they are not going to have it and that does not  solve our purpose. And also, it has to be easy 
to handle and store .  (Refer  Slide Time:  29:35)  
 
So, the way forward , the complete  feeds, that i s the featu re. So,  you have to because 
espec ially because we are talking we wi ll be talking about intensive -aquaculture all lecture 
long in the  coming lectures also, where we wi ll be disc ussing complete feeds. Complete feeds 
should have all the ingredients , protein , carbohydrates, fat , vitamins,  minerals.  
Like at a particular  ratio which is very much beneficial for the optimal growth and the health 
of the fish. Most of the fish farmers th ey use the complete diet s typically made up of the 
following components like the pr otein has to be around 18 to 50 percent , lipids 10  to 25 , 
carbohydrates 15 to 20 percent,  ash content less than 8.5 percent,  phosphorus content less 
than 1.5 percent, w ater, try to make it less than 10 percent .  
I will discuss about it in later slide like what is different type of fish feeds and all , there are  
type of weight  feed, there are  type of moist feed, which has a quarter content can be as high 
as 30 , 40 percent as we ll. They are also do, There also do, people are using those kind  of fish 
feed as well. And obviously crash  amounts of vitamins and minerals which are beneficial f or 
your target species that you a re culturing  there .  
The nutritional content of the fee d it d epends on the species you a re culturing and its life 
stage , definitely it depends on the life  stage, you a re not  going to give a enough when it i s 
fingerling amount of food that it requires for its adult stage . So,  most of the feed will go 
wasted and it wi ll cause the environmental harm , nothing else and the wastage of money. S o, 
complete  fish are required when , when we want to rare high-density  indoor systems and 
where natural food is completely unavailable .  (Refer Slide Time:  31:23)  
 
So, these are the references that we us e while preparing the slides. You can use you can go 
ahead with the studying these papers and this research papers. If you need I can share you 
these slides  in these lectures , research papers  as well with you so perhaps to , for you to have a 
better overview on the system  and all . So, that i s it for the day for t his lecture. Thank you so 
much.  