Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Aquaculture  and Food  Engineering  
India n Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture  07 
Intensive  Farming  in High  Tech  Tanks  
Welcome  everyone , my name  is Professor  Gaurav  Dhar  Bhowm ick from  the agriculture  and 
food engineering  department  of IIT Kharagpur . So in this lecture  module  this is the second  
lecture  of module  2 technology  of closed  aquacultur e, so in this course  advanced  aquaculture  
technology  we have  already  discussed  about  in details  some  basics  of aquaculture  systems . 
So, In this particular  lecture  I will be discussing  you about  the intensive  farming  in high tech 
farms  high tech tanks  and or farms .  
(Refer  Slide  Time  00:55)  
 
  
The concept  that I will be covering  is the compariso n between  extensive , semi -intensive  and 
intensive  aquaculture  systems . We have  already  discussed  about  it in brief  in previous  lecture  
we will be discussing  more  in scientific  terms  in this particular  lecture . The intensive  
aquaculture  system  in general , the intensive  farming  in high tech tanks  and the zero water  
discharge  systems .  
We already  know  what  is the difference  between  extensive , semi -intensive  and the intensive  
aquaculture.  In case of extensive  the it is the least managed  the aquaculture  systems , it 
depends  on the natural  resources  for nutrient , it has a very low productivity  of around  1000  
kg per hectare  per year.  
Whereas  in case of semi -intensive  it requires  moderate  input  fertilizers  and supplement  may 
be required , the moderate  product ivity it has like 3 to 10 ton per hectare  whereas  in case of 
intensive  aquaculture  the based  on the artificial  feed we normally  go for very high 
productivity  in case of intensive  aquaculture  systems , we get it and it can go approximately  
say like almost  1.3 lakh kg per hectare  per year.  
In case of extensive , semi -intensive  and intensive  aquaculture  you can see from  the figure  
itself  how it looks  like. So in case of intensive  aquaculture  systems  we need  to go ahead  with 
the more  of anthropogenic  development s, the more of a reactors , more  number  of the tanks  or 
the raceways  or the pond  whatever  we are utilizing .  
Whereas  in semi -intensive  we only have  to worry  about  the feed and the fertilizers  some  time 
to time if we can see that the production  has some  issues with the amount  of feed or the fertilizer  requirement  is there . In case of extensive  aquaculture  we don’t have  to worry  about  
or any one of this.  
(Refer  Slide  Time  02:59)  
 
  
In case of intensive  aquaculture  systems  it involves  the artificial  tanks , ponds , cages  and 
raceways  for rearing  the fishes  in a high stock  intensity . It facilitates  the maximum  fish 
production  from  a minimum  amount  of water . We are feeding  the artificial  food whereas  the 
natural  food is almost  not available  in most  of the cases , also the main  problem  incorporated  
with the intensive  aquaculture  system  is the high input  of energy  that it requires  interms  
because  of the presence  of additional  amount  of nutrients  that we have  to supply , the filtration  
unit that is available , the aeration system  that we need  to utilize , the pumping  system  that we 
need  to involve  for the for all of this we need  to actually  requires  a huge  amount  of energy  
and which  actually  one of the major  disadvantages  of intensive  aquaculture  systems .  
We have  alread y discussed  all those  things  and let’s go through  it again  briefly , so to go 
ahead  with further  idea to  get a  fresh  idea about  like how what  are the high-tech tanks  that we 
will be discussing  soon . How it differs  with the all the existing  knowledge  that is available  in 
the aquaculture  system s. It has a very high yield  as I discussed  involved  with the high cost of 
investment  overall  return  exists  the operational  cost so it definitely  ensures  the high profit , 
low energy  losses  from  the feed input , it has a high feed conversion  ratio from  the specific  
artificial  feed that we normally  use.  
In case of input  functions  we have  the supplying  water , stocking  density , feeding  interval , the 
fertilizing  capacity  and what  are the fertilizers  that you will be utilizing , what  are the  what  is 
the amount  of like providing  light? This is the input  function  for the intensive  aquaculture  
systems , what  are the treatment  functions ? The temperature  control , the phosphorus  control , 
metal  control  solid  organic  matter , nitrogen  disea se control , ph control  and the dissolved 
oxygen  in the carbon  oxide .  So if you see the dark ones are actually  the one which  is kind of must  and the one which  is 
like light colors  is actually  the one which  is optional , but actually  involves  in case of if you 
want  to have  a high amount  yield  from  your system .  
Output  functions  always  obviously  the harvesting  of the system  other  than that processing  
effluent , processing  solid  waste , preventing  the escape  of the catch  or escape of the your 
culture  spaces  and controlling  the greenhouse  gas emission . So these  are all involved  in the 
intensive  aquaculture  system  and I think  to your surprise  like intensive  aquaculture  system  
actually  one of the major  culprit  of producing  the greenhouse  gaseous  emission  in the natur e, 
so how to get rid of it I will discuss  about  it in details  like what  are the procedures  and all.  
(Refer  Slide  Time  06:00)  
 
  
So in general  the intensive  farming  in high tech tanks  we go for the culturing  the breeds  for 
two to three  months  into the fingerlings  within  the tank. Based on shape  there  are three  types  
of shape  circular  which  is like simple  maintenance  which  are easy for the effective  water  use 
and also it facilitates  the self-cleaning  action .  
It also maintain  the uniform  water  quality , it supports  the operation  at a wide  range  of 
rotational  velocities  for maintaining  the fish health  and conditions , it can facilitate  the rapid  
flushing  and settleable  solid  through  the center  drain  because  it’s like a rectangula r in a 
circular  in nature  and it has a particular  slope  and which  looks  like a hoovering  structure . So 
in the middle  of it we have this you know  the center  drain  is there  so because  of this slope ; all 
the settleable  solid  will actually  wash  out through  this center  drain . It has a typic al size of 
around  12 to 30 feet and in diameter  and 4 to 5 feet in depth , ideal  for rearing the tilapia .  
Rectangular  tanks  are there,  we it can be built very quickly  but provide  a very good  space  
however  it has a very poor flow characteristics , so leading  to the waste  accumulation  and the 
reduced  aeration  so that’s why we normally  go for oval or the circular  one only. In case of 
oval it poses  the benefits  of both circular  as well as the rectangular  tank.  
If you ask me what  are the some  example  of the closed intensive  aquaculture  systems  so let’s 
first discuss  about  some  existing  one before  going for discussing  about  the high tech 
technology  that we have  nowadays  let’s discuss  about  the existing  ones, not only existing  but 
even  these  technologies  are actual ly nowadays  evolving  and people  scientists  are actually  
trying  to find out solutions  for all the possible  cons part of this kind of technologies .  Like, First of all say like biofloc  technology  it is, it comes  with a lot of advantages ; first of all 
it almo st low to no water  exchange  is required , improve  system  from  the batch  systems  like 
we can go ahead  with the adding  of carbon  source  which  can enhance  the heterotrophic  
bacterial  consortium  in the bioflo c itself , it can emphasize  the carbon  to nitrogen  ratio in the 
system  and also the waste  nitrogen  which  is converted  to a high concentration  of the total 
suspende d solids  that can act as a highly  protein  feed for cultured  animals . Okay!  How it 
works ?  
First of all see we have  a aquaculture  waste , Okay!  which  has a carbon  and which  has a 
nitrogen  compound  though  we call it a waste  for us it is a waste  but for them  some  
microorg anisms  that is a feed, so what  they we are doing , we are trying  to develop  the the 
biofloc technology  is what  we are trying  to develop  the heterotropic  microorganisms  which  
will consume  this carbon  source  as a feed, this nitrogen  source  as a feed and it will convert  
this carbon  and nitrogen  into their own biomass . Isn’t it? Then this microbial  biomass  is 
actually  used as a feed for the cultured  animal .  
So, see it is a win win situation  for us we can treat the waste  water , we can utilize  that treated  
element  again  come  back to its feeding  it is your own cultured  animal  and all cultural  species  
and all. Other than that, it can help you for well mixing  and also having  well aeration  like if 
you can supply  with the well mixing  and well aeration  it can compensate  for the BOD  of in 
the system  as well, the biochemical  oxygen  demand  can also be reduced .  
I think  you already  know  what  is biochemical  oxygen  demand , right ? so this biochemical  
oxygen  demand  it is a very important  parameter  you need  to understand  whenever  you will 
be working  with any water  related  activities , any water  quality  related  engineering  or water  
quality  related  technology  or say like any science  subjects , you have  to understand  COD,  
BOD,  what  is PH, what  is different  nitrogen  species  like total nitrogen , ammoni acal nitroge n, 
kjeldahl  nitrogen . So what  are those  parameters , how it is defined  I am leaving  up to you, you 
need  to search for it, go google  it and you will try to understand  what  are these  parameters  
and try to understand  this parameter , these  are very important  parameters .  
No matter , because  see, if your fisheries  graduate  student  if you are a undergraduate  or 
postgrad uate student  from  fishery , fishery  biology , fishery  engineering , aquaculture  
engineering  or even  if you are a simple  aquaculture  enthusiastic  unless  until you do not know  
these  parameters  water  quality  parameters  it will be very hard for you to understand  the further  development  of these  subjects  or any other  subject s related  to the this course  or like 
this kind of aquaculture  technologies . So, try to under stand  try to learn  these  things .  
Next is the Periphython  technology , it also have  almost  low to no water discharge  required , it 
improves  the system  from  the batch  system  like it is much  better  than the batch , it needs  the 
organic  substrate  that is a bambo o for the the periphyton  to attach  to its surface , the input  
organic  matter  that is manure  and the chemical  fertilizer  is utilized  to trigger  the periphyton  
growth  on its on the surface  of the bamboo .  
Sometimes  needs  additional  carbon  source  to maintain  a proper  carbon  to nitrogen  ratio in the 
systems , but however , this periphyton  acts as a nitrogen  remov al system  and food source  for 
the cultured  animal . So here also we have  this win-win situation  as I discussed  in the biofloc  
technology  also.  
This periphyton s they not only consumes  the nitrogen  species  which  is like toxic  in nature , 
you know  that even a certain  the even  very small  amount  of ammoniacal  nitrogen  present  in 
the system  or if it is a free ammonia  gas then even  it is more  toxic  for the fish to survive  or 
any aquatic  species  to survive  in general .  
In order  to remove  the nitrogen  however , they are generating  that nitrogen  itself  so you need  
to remove  that nitrogen  from  the system , how we can remove  it which  is toxic  in nature ? You 
use this kind of technologies  like biofloc , periphyton s, etc I will be discussing  that is the main  
motto  of any treatment  you need  that we incorporate  in aquaculture  treatment aquacultu re 
wastewater  treatment . Okay!  
Then removal  of nitrogen  that is one of the major  thing  that we need  to think  about . And in 
order  to do that for periphyton,  see periphyton  or any kind of microorganism  or any kind of 
animal  say even  us, we need  a proper  ratio. We will not only keep  on having  water  without  
any food we need  food also; even  in food also if you are only giving  rice like any Bengali  
like us I do not like to have  only rice I need  the dal as well. Right?  
So it is like you need  to provide  carbon  source  as well which  to maintain  a proper  carbon  to 
nitrogen  ratio so that the periphyton  will find it you know  very pleasant  to have  the food and 
they will consume  it more  and they will repro duce  and this periphyton  will act as a food 
source  for the cultured  animal . So you are treating  the nitrogen  source  from  the system  and 
you are in the on the other  hand  you are providing  the food source  for your cultured  animal .  (Refer  Slide  Time  13:41)  
 
What are the other  intensive  aquaculture  system  that is available  is RAS.  RAS,  I think  you 
guys  alread y have  some  idea about  what  is RAS , recirculatory  aquaculture  system , where  
practically  no water  exchange  is happening . It involves  stages  of treatment  processes ; 
primary , secondary , tertiary  if needed . Initially  what  is the primary  treatment ?  
Primary  treatment  means  majorly  primary  treatment  consists  of the filtering  operation , 
filtering  of all the suspended  solid  presen t in your aquaculture  wastewater . So how it is done  
we use drum  filter , we use different  kind of filtering  mechanism , screen s filter  and all we use 
it accordingly  so we try to get rid of using  this filter  we try to get rid of all the suspended  
solid  presen t in your system  that is the first process .  
Second  is the biochemical  process , we go for secondary  treatment , secondary  treatment  
where  we actually  introduce  microbiota  in our system;  or in say  separately in a separate  
system  which  will be called  as bio filter.  So what  it will do it will treat the waste  water  by 
converting  the chemical  elements  present  in the waste  water  into the biomass . Okay!  hat it 
will do?  
Those microorganisms  they will consume  that carbon  nitrogen  present  in the waste  water  
they consume  it and they develop  their biomass  and it will be converted  into a biomass  which  
is easy to separate , in elemental  form  or in biomass  form  once  it is consumed  by the 
microorganism . Now, we can simply  separate  out the biomass , we can simply  separate  out 
the microorganism  that is it the final water  that is coming  out of the system  is like pollutant  
free that water  we can again  traverse  it back  to the tank or our culture  media  cultu re say like 
pond  or raceway .  That’s how we treat the aquaculture  wastewater  in a recirculatory  aquaculture  system . This 
microbial  compartment  we call it biofilter . It has a very defined  microbial  consortium  isolated  
or the clear  water  systems  we use the main  purpose  is to biologically  secure  and hygiene  
aquaculture  product .  
Sometimes  what  we do we also incorpor ate tertiary  treatment  unit also as I discussed  earlier , 
the ozonation , UV irradiation  or any other  advanced  oxidation  processes . This advanced  
oxidation  processes  what  it does even  if some  amount  of unwanted  microbiota  is left out like 
or some  amount  of nutrient  is still available  in your waste  water  this processes  will consume  
that also and at the end whatever  the outcome  whatever  the output  of this tertiary  treatment  
units  will be completely  void of all the pollutant , so then that is very good  it is okay  for 
applying  back  to the tank again  that is what  we do in case of recirculat ory aquaculture  
system .  
Then there  comes  the green  water  techniques ; it also has a very low water  exchange . It uses 
the batch  system  mostly  the autotrophic  microalgae  used as a microbial  component  in the 
system . It utilizes  the chemical  fertilizer  and also organic  waste  to trigger  the phytoplankton  
growth .  
We have  no control  in the microbe  community  in this particular  type of systems . However , 
the main  moto  is what ? First of all to provide  the natural  food for the cultured  animal  this 
phytoplankton . Second  thing  this phytoplankton  or this microalgae  whenever  they try to grow  
what  they will do they will utilize  they need  the nutri tion nutrients .  
Where they get these  nutrients  from ? From the pond  itself , which  things  they will utilize ? The 
nitrogen  and carbon  source . This nitrogen  and carbon  source  are the nutrients  for the culture  
species , so they will utilize  it and they will grow  as a biomass  and this biomass  is utilized  
further  by the cultured  species  itself . By this way we have  a nice like small  scale  artificial  
ecosystem  build  up in the treatment  tank itself  in the tank itself.  (Refer  Slide  Time  18:00)  
 
 
So, these  are all the technologies  that is already  available  and people  are working  on it and 
still there  are advanced  level  of these  technologies  are already  there , so what  are the further  
advancement  that is happening  in this kind of systems . We call it there  is a technology  
recently  we discussed  about ; we normally  try to go ahead  with the zero water  discharge  
system .  
It's actually a type  , Its a sustainable  intensive  high tech tank systems  where  we maintain  the 
water  quality , we prevent  the spreading  of the pathogen , we try to prevent  the nutrient -rich 
wastewater  discharge  into the environment , we utilize  the principle  of microbial  loops  to 
convert  the toxic  nitrogenous  compounds  like ammonium  or nitrite into lesser  toxic  form  like 
say nitrate  and this nitrate  and even  if it can be further  utilized  by the plant  and all if we can supply  with any phytoplankton , if it can supply with micro  biota  or if you can supply  with say 
like any how to say  micro  algae  and all, so they can utilize  it and they can further  reduce  the 
overall  pollutant  load of the system .  
It involves  with the regular  addition  of the microbial  consortia  to the system , it reduces  the 
water  uses by partially  or totally  reusing  the cultured  water . Species  which  normally  we go 
ahead  with the zero water  discharge  systems  shrimps , prawns  etc.  
If you see this particu lar design  given  by Suantika  et al., 2018  in this reference  also you can 
you can  see at the end of the lecture  video . So the feed is given  to the shrimp,  uneaten  feed 
considered  as a organic  matter . The shrimp  whatever  the excretory  product  that they are 
developing  going  to the converted  to the organic  matter  uric acid or amino  acid.  
We utilize  some  heterotrophic  microorganism , heterotrophic  bacteria  what  they will do, they 
will convert  this uric acid and amino  acid to ammonium  ion, Right? NH 4+, this ammon ium 
ion then be utilized  by the nitrifying  microorganism . How they work , first the ammonium  
oxidizing  bacteria  will start working  on it, you you know  the example  of it, nitrobacter . 
Okay!  
Nitrobacter  are one of the examples  of this kind of nitrifying  micro organism , nitrifying  
bacteria . So they use nitrosomonas  nitrobacter  they normall y use this ammonia  and nitrite  for 
as a feed and they convert  it to the nitrate  as the end product  is the nitrate.  This ammonium  
oxidizing  bacteria  and nitrite oxidizing  bacter ia they convert  it to the nitrate , so this nitrate  is 
actually  utilized  by the micro algae .  
As I told you like this nitrate  is a rich source  of how to say uhh  food or a rich source  of 
nutrient  for the plant  to grow  any kind of plant  to grow . So what  is happening  this nitrate  is 
actually  utilized  by the micro algae , this at the same  time what  microalgae  is doing? It not 
only utilizes  the nitrate  not only utilizes  the nitrate  for their respiration  process  they also give 
out like some  breathe  out the oxygen  which actually  causes  the dissolved  oxygen  level  to 
high in your system .  
So it’s a  complete  it’s a  complete  how to say umm   not only energy  balance  it is a nice cycle  
that we are making , its a nutrient  cycle  that we are developing  inside  the system . So that 
everything  will happen  you know  all the nutrients  will be in a same  cycle  and all the recovery  
can be also happen , nutrient  recovery  can also happen  and also the reduced  amount  of water  
uses can be can also be possible .  After the treatment  is done  this micro algae  may be considered  as organic  matter  even  this can 
be utilized  as a feed also for certain  type of aquatic  species  and this see microalgae  it will go 
directly  as a biomass  for light feed for the shrimp.  So this is how in general  the nutrient  cycle  
of a zero waste  disposal  system  of say any aquaculture  process  looks  like.  
In general  if you ask me there  are procedures of there may be certain  changes  in the 
procedures , there  may be certain  variations  we can do in these procedures  by which  
sometimes  we may not need  the heterotropic  microorganism  at all, sometimes  we may enrich  
the growth  of heterotrophic  microorganisms  in the tank itself  by utilizing  some  particular  
type of stones , particular  type of rocks  there .  
So they will develop  the heterotropic  mechanisms  by themselves  somehow  if you can make  
some  anaerobicity  there ; there  are ways , there  are scientific  explorations  there  are 
explorations  there , n number  of research  papers  are there . If you are interested  we can  you 
can go and we can learn  more  about it; in the  just google  it with all these  keywords  and you 
will get a very nice research  papers . Even from  IIT Kharagpur  itself  we are also working  on 
this kind of technology  a lot for like last couple  of years  and that also will be a very 
beneficial  for all of you, so this is how zero waste  disposal  system  it looks  like. Okay!  
(Refer  Slide  Time  23:39)  
 
So, in general  this is a very standard  practice  that you see in this standard  practice  in this 
standard  method  that is given  by Suantika  et al., 2018 . You see the aerator  line is given  in 
each of the segments  like say it has like four segments , first reactor  is nitrifying  bacteria  
reactor , second  is micro  algae  reactor , fourth  is this the whole  tank itself  where  the cultured  
water  is there , fifth is this aerators  are there .  If you see the micro  algae  if you see the first the tank in the tank you have  a feeding  tray, you 
have  a culture  water , you have  a aeration  going  on, you have  a thermometer  is there  to 
control  the environment , you have  a paranet cover s. In the bottom  you have  this this calcium  
carbonate  calcium  carbonate  gravel s are present , so these  substrates  are given  for the bacterial  
attachment  and the buffering  agent  it is used and also this actually  helps  the treatment  that 
water  then it goes to the nitrifying  bacteria chamber  which is like you know  where  there  is 
nitrifying  bacteria  reactor  is there .  
So this nitrifying  bacteria  what  they will do whatever  the ammonia  that is generated  from  this 
waste  water  they will convert  it to the nitrate ; nitrite and then nitrate . This nitrate  then goes to 
the micro  algal  reactor , the micro  algal  reactor  they will utilize  that nitrate  and the final water  
which  is completely  void of any nitrogen  element  nitrogen  species  it will come  back  to the 
culture  tank the final  tank I mean  the itself  for your target  species .  
What are the units  microbial  culture  tank as I already  discussed  it a separate  unit facilitates  
the easier  maintenance , the tank sizes  are almost  20 percent  of the culture  tanks  for like the 
nitrifyi ng bacteria  or the micro  algae  and 2.5 percent  of the culture  tank is required  for the 
heterotropic  bacteria  grow to grow .  
Aeration  unit in general  aerators , silicon  hose or air stones  are used, air flow rate you have  to 
maintain  based  on the volume  of the reactor  and the expectation  and the intensity  like 
stock ing intensity,  etc. Dissolv ed oxygen  level  has to be maintained  4 to 6 ppm. The net 
covering  is given  for to prevent  the net pollutant  entry  and reduce  the water  evaporation  and 
the light penetratio n. Thermometer  is used to monitor  the daily  culture  temperature  and 
feeding  trays  are provided  to the daily  feed and I already  discussed  the process  and the 
requirement  of the calcium  carbonate  and the gravel .  (Refer  Slide  Time  26:10)  
 
 
So this zero water discharge  or zero waste  disposal  type of system  what  it does, it actually  
helps  us to device  the very high like high-end intensive  aquaculture  systems . In general  the 
intensive  farming  is the best managed  practice  for its , its very much  practiced  all over the 
world  for its high productivity  other  than that it is very much  active  in terms  of the water  uses 
also and it can be further  developed  to the different  level  when  we go for designing  this kind 
of zero waste  disposal  or the zero water  discharge  systems.  
In this kind of ZWD  system  is based  on the principle  of microbial  loops  as I already  
discussed  in the last slide . It also maintain  the water  quality  and prevents  the spreading  of 
pathogens  all together  because  in general  whatever  the amount  of pathog ens that can be present  in the system  it is possible  for them  being like fo r them to utilize  by the heterotroph ic 
bacteria.  Okay!  
I am giving  you one very fine information  in this particular  case how the spreading  of 
pathogen  is possible  to control , possib le to prevent . When we go for the heterotrophic  growth  
of microorganisms  which  will consume  and use this urea and urea and uric acid to convert  it 
to the ammonia  we try to go for some  friendly  heterotrops  like bacillus , in general  what  they 
will do they are the friendly  heterotrophic  microorganisms  and the presence  of them , actually   
they actually  have  a quorum  sensing  mechanism  by which  they can somehow  outlay  all the 
unwanted  pathogens  present  in the system .  
This system  this quorum  sensing  is a very specific methods  kind of I am not going  to details  
in this method  they actually  try to they communicate  between  each other  by this process  they 
can get rid off, if you know or  if you search  for this term this keyword  quorom  sensing  in 
google  and read its very interesting  thing  you will be very surprised  to know  this technologies  
in this quorom  sensing  thing  that is available  in that how we are actually  utilizing  this quorom  
sensing  fundamentals  for the microbial  communication  for our own purpose  and it is being  
very famously  like very like profoundly  used in the research  field nowadays  in microbial  
research  field nowadays . Anyway , so they actually  help prevent  the spreading  of the 
pathogens  so by this way we can get rid of the pathogens  as well using  this hetero trophic  
growth  of microorganism  in the this ZWD  or zero water  discharge  system s and  all. 
So that is how the system  will looks  like, so I am giving  you just a very brief  introduction  and 
very brief  idea of only one specific  type of zero water  discharge  system. Okay!   There are 
ample  amount  of examples  available  in the literature  even  we are also working  on different  
type of ZWD  systems  in IIT Kharagpu r and we have  worked  on previously  also.  
So there  also you can find the literatures  available  in the interne t which  involves , which  will 
give you more  in-depth  idea about  how it looks  like and what  are the different  treatment  
benefits , what  are the differ ent system  benefits  that it will offer  when  you go for the 
designing  any aquaculture  farm  and all.  
So these  are the references  that I have  utilized  for preparing  this material  for this lecture  
material . So we will go ahead  with the details  soon  with more  in-depth  engineering  design  
and drawing  of advanced  aquaculture  systems  in coming  lectures , so that’s all for now. Thank  
you so much . 