Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 01  
Introduction    
Hello everyone, welcome to this new NP TEL online certification course on Advanced 
Aquaculture Technol ogy. My name is Professor Gourav  Dhar Bhowmick. I am from the 
agriculture and f ood engineering department of IIT Kharagpur . In this module, I wi ll be 
discussing more very basic actually about that aquaculture and different terminol ogies that is   
But overall, in this whole 12 week of lecture series, I will mainly be focusing on the 
advancement in aquaculture , in worldwide scenario, what are the technology that is available 
which can be r eplicated which can be you know utilize d it can be, which can definitely make 
people benefit out of it, if they utilize it in Indian scenario to be precisely .  
What are the employability options, those are available in aquaculture , how people not only think 
about employabi lity, but also think about th e R and D possibility, different R and D institutes  I 
mean like resear ch and development institutes are there  in India , how they are working on it and 
what are the lacuna  that is available still now in Indian context and how that can be you know 
minimized and that can be you know, troubleshooted that will be discussed in details in  this 12 
week of lecture series.  
Majorly my focus will be on the advancement in aquaculture technology, which can be utilized 
which that knowledge can be utilized by the young ge neration. So, that  is actually my main 
motto. Okay! To start with why I  you know introduce this subject. So, first of all, in Indian 
peninsula,  if you look  up look into it  like properly  so, it ’s like almost 7500 kilometre  of area  is 
exposed to the sea , like this is the coastal area is available.  
If you include the exclusive economic zone, it will be almost 2 million square kilometre  of area , 
which is available considered under the Indian Territory  where peopl e can utilize it that area for 
aquaculture devel opment . Okay! So, that is the, that is my main focus. So, for all of you , 
whoever is actually  you know  listening or like watching this video right now, to get yourself 
accustomed with the advancement in this sector, and also get yourself accustomed with th e 
knowledge available in the R and D sector and the experts like us.  So, that you will get to know you will use that technology you can use those knowledge in your 
daily life or you can even think about being an aquaculture expert or maybe in future being  an 
entrepreneur as well. And definitely there is  a huge possibility of  being a research scholar or 
being a doing  a research in this particular field. T here is v ast possibility in Indian context as of 
now.  
So, IIT Kharagpur is actually offering this aquac ulture engineering specializations where people 
can go and admit and then definitely they will get some v ery advanced knowledge about this  
sector, and that can be very much useful for their own benefit and also for the development  of 
our country in gener al. Okay! So, that ’s the basic that’s  the brief about the course that I wi ll be 
teaching in next 12 week.  
So, however, to start with, we need to start we need to start understanding the basic of 
aquaculture because many of you may not know about the basic s of aquacultu re, what is 
aquaculture ? For you, i f you think about it, if I ask you , what is aquaculture ? What will come  
into your mind ? The first thing is aqua is like  you know  its like it is something related to water.  
right!  So, in water, you a re culturin g something or rearing something that can be considered as 
aquaculture.  
So, aquaculture practices, what you are culturing something in an aqueous medium. I n general, 
we consider only the water where we are culturing any particular aquatic organism and the n that 
will give us for some particular reason definitely anthropogenic activities necessar y, what do I 
mean by anthropogenic activity means human involvement.  Okay!  So, anthropogenic activity 
based aquatic culture systems  are called aquaculture system . Okay!  Just to give you a very 
overall idea about it.  (Refer Slide Time: 04:45)  
 
So, what will be the concept that I wi ll be covering in this pa rticular lecture? To start with I wi ll 
discuss about the aquaculture. Second, what is the significance  of it. W e will be discussing some 
details  about the global statistics. I ’ll discuss about the role of aquaculture in achieving the food 
security , in a world like you know knowing the whole wor ld point of view and what ’s it way 
forward . Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 05: 10) 
 
To start with as I already discussed about what is aquaculture. So,  I think it is not very difficult 
for you to understand that any controlled cultivation of aquatic organism whether it be fish, whether it be aqua tic weed, whether it be molluscs , whe ther it be crustaceans, w hether it be 
crocodile anything. S o, anything and everything that you a re culturin g in an aqueous medium 
you know say in a pond , in a tank , in a open sea  wherever it is, it will be con sidered under 
aquaculture. Okay! So, it not onl y involves , what  do I mean by the culturing? I t involves 
everything right from the b reeding, rearing and harvesting.  
Each and every acti vities involved with this you know rearing or cultivating  species will be 
considered under t he aquaculture practice.  Okay! In general for the human consumption, and I 
would n’t say the only human consumption but also I would say like different other purposes as 
well. We normally focus on two diffe rent type of fisheries.  Okay! First one is capture fisheries 
and second one is  culture fisheries .  
Majorly in  a broader perspective, in aquaculture, we sometimes in clude capture fisheries as well. 
But actually, aquaculture not always necessar y to be included with the capture fisheries . Capture 
fisheries means you go and get a  wild c atch, means you have your fishing vessel, you take your 
vessel you go to the open sea , go to say inland water bodies, and you catch fish from there , that 
is not aquaculture i n general look at that is called c apture fishery . You are capturing Okay! from 
wild collection that is c alled c apture fisheries .  
Then there comes the culture fisher ies, where you will  be doing the these all these practices 
rearing and the cultu ring of your species, by you all by your own that will be considered as under 
culture fisheri es. Okay!  So, what makes this aquaculture so important nowadays, you know, 
people earlier, we do  not worry about it, aquaculture and  all, that  is not som ething to be, you 
know, you know it’s like thought about just like it just, it ’s something which is  you know just go 
and catch some fish, it ’s like  you know , some hobby kind of thing.  
But time is changing  you know  for the last couple of decades, it ’s becoming a very big industry 
all over the world. And believe me in coming decades, it will be one of the ma jor factor 
differentiating  between  different countries GDP.  Okay!  Aquaculture in Indian context, as of 
now, it is not contributing even 1 percent  of its GDP, whereas it  has the capacity to go up to 4 
percent of its GDP contribute to 4 percent  of its GDP.  
And India has tha t capacity, that ’s why we are introducing these kind of subjects to let you know 
that what you can do , what you c an what changes that you can mad e. So , to change the scenario to involved with the this change involved with this blue revolut ions that is happen ing all over the 
world. Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:14)  
 
So, what ’s the significance of it ? In couple last couple of decades. I would say the last two 
decades to be precisely aqu aculture sector has been matured like anything. L ots of ex perts and 
the specialists are working all over the world in this s ector and then try to develop  you know  
some techn ology and high end i nformation centre  and all, where you can get all the necessary 
data necessary information related to aquaculture. Okay!  
In aquaculture, there is a recent trend of huge growth and the growth in the value chain as well. 
The fish nutrition, genetics and alternate type of feed are being experimented and researched all 
over the world now, and which  is actually helping the aquacul ture to bloom in a multiple way. 
Other than that, the expa nded culture of extractive bivalves and the seaweeds are also considered 
under this aquaculture and which are one of the major reason of one of the major source of you 
know how to say the economic r eturn .  
This seaweed, I a m telling you this seaweed is  like a green gold for you know if you consider 
about you know marine environment and  the seaweed has tremendous amount of like the 
properties the chemical that it has. It has a lot of applicat ions. I w ould say like  you can go ahead 
with a pharmaceutica l, you can go ahead with a food  chemical, human consumption,  personal 
care prod ucts, medical products, like it ’s like it has a lot of application. Okay!  And at the end i f you are not  after utilizing every thing after the extraction is done, this extracted 
this all the nutrient extracted biomass the final biomass that will be getting that can be use d as a 
livestock fodder  as well. I t will reduce the overall methane emission, you will be surprised to 
know tha t these kind of activities are not bein g practiced in most of the part  of the most of the 
part of the  world  actually .  
Simple change in the feed of livestock and reduce the greenhouse emission like anything . You 
know, the agriculture is  especially the live stock is one of the major re ason of greenhouse in the 
world . Especially the cow farming and all . It can be  reduced because their colon their  system has 
developed the greenhouse  gases  very frequent ly very you know in a very high amount , that can 
be minimize d just by changing the food ingredients.  
So, the fo od that you a re providing to your livestock, if you added with the seaweed and some 
extract of t he seaweeds, there is a there is  lot of investig ations and expert has been said  a lot of 
time that it is pos sible to reduce the greenhouse emission gas emissions from livestock culturing 
just by changing the feed ingredients and all.  
So, it has a multifaceted application not only that this  seaweed wherever you will be culturing, it 
can clean the wastewa ter it c an clean the water also. B ecause it consumed the nutrient f rom the 
surrounding ecosystem a nd suppose it is in the coastal region or suppose it is in the say estuary 
region, where the river water is jus t in a river is just in come in contact with the sea w hich we 
call river mouth sometime.  
If we grow the sea weed  there they will consume this wastewater they will consume the pollutant 
present in the wastewater and by this way, you can get a fresh water out of it, I  would not say 
like it ’s like fresh like anyt hing, but definitely it can reduce the pollut ant level.  So, these are the  
these are the you know applications different applications that expe rts have been they have  found 
in especially if you do the seaweed culture in your territory or you say like in  in your coastal 
region and all.  
And not only that, it will give you a lot of employabil ity opportunity as well. Okay!  The local 
people can get a lot of  you know lot of  job and all if you start working on this kind of new 
opportunities and all . Okay! Perfect! So, o ther than that, another  you know good thing about 
aquaculture  is like it ’s year-round  availability, you do not have to worry about you know, like in a specific time of the year you will only get it because it depends upon your scientifi c knowledge 
and the way you have design your system and where  design your value chain.  
So, you will get year-round  availabilit y of your aquatic products and all.  Okay!  It becomes a 
reliable source of protein and micronutrients for the I  would say human food  human 
consum ption, but in future there is will be a time when it will be more  and more  you know  
dominating foods source  of nutrient and protein for human consumption for sure.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:16)  
 
Now, if we talk abo ut some global statistics. Okay!  Remember we discuss about the culture 
fisheries and capture fisheries. I f you see this capture fisheries in the first three rows, the third 
row says the total  captured including inland and m arine culture at the end in the begi nning it 
shows in the column wise  1986 to 1995 data on an average per year actually and there is at the 
end you will get the at the last column you will get 2018 data .  
If you see the total capture from starting from 1986 . It was as low as 86. 9. Now, it goes up to 
96.4. The difference is not much  right? Definitely because it i s capture fisheries , we have a  
limitation in the in the  while  we have limitation in the nature. Y ou cannot just keep on capturing 
because you keep on capturing and all of a sud den the fish started in a you know school of fish  
started producing like anything and you have multi you know, you get a huge amount of cas h in 
a single and a particular day this  not possible .  There is a nature has limited source and t he replenishment needs time. It ’s same as like you 
know renewable and non-renewable  energy sources , isn’t it?  Fossil fuels has its limitation we 
have specific amount of fossil fuels reserved in the earth  you cannot just keep on extracting it 
will come out of nowhere. That is why the capture fisheries is always is almost at the same stage 
till 19  30 years back till now and it ’s 96.4 you know  the million tonne . Whereas if  you go to the 
aqua culture, total aquaculture at t hat point it was only 101 I am in like total 14.9 million tonne . 
Now, it becomes at 82.1 million tonne  in 20 18 data . This  data has is given from the source of 
food and a griculture organizations data in 2020 .  
If you think about in last 4  years, I can guarantee you though there is no data available for that, 
but people are working on it, I can guarantee these val ues are almost same now this capture 
fisheries and cultur e fisheri es it is contributing almost 50 50 perce nt of world fish demand right 
now. And in coming decade , it will drastically change . It will just the other  way round. T he 
culture fishery will bloom  like anything and the capture fisheries will not sustain at all a nd that is 
because  obviously it is  it is not a sustainable way of doing fisheries in  capture most of the cases. 
Okay!  
Because your  it’s our you know, it ’s our hunger  that our hunger that we  even if we want say like 
1 kg of some stuff, but if you are getting like say 5  kg w e keep on extracting the 5  kg we do  not 
think about that extra 4  kg that if we left in nature, that can give us another  16 kg in say, like 
coming year. But we are  greedy enou gh. So , we whenever we find an opportunity, we try to 
extract as many as for as many stuff as possible and get the maximum return.  
And we do  not think about the future. So , that will happen and that i s why capture fish is not at 
all a sustai nable way of y ou know culturing capturing the fisheries and all . And so, culture f isher 
will develop aqu aculture will develop the total world fisheries and a quacu lture contribution right 
now is around 100 almost 180 million ton ne. Out of them if you see almost if you think about the 
human consumption almost 156 million tonne out of 17 8 is for human consumption non-food 
uses is like almost 22.2 .  
If you divided with the population in bill ion say like 7.6 billion net and it was there in 2018 . It 
will be if the per capita c urrent consumption will come down to 20 point come to 20.5 kg per 
capita. This is  per year, Okay!  this is per year I a m talking about. So, in 2019 85 7 86 it was 13.4 kg per capita per year. Now , it is 20.5 kg per capita per year this human consumptio n are  
increasing they have  this is like apparent consumption of per capita is increasing.  
Trade if you see like, you know, as of now this fish export in value, it comes as h igh as 164 US 
billion USD. It i s a huge amo unt of money. And that is what I a m saying I  was discussing, like, 
you know, it ’s the time is changing, like in aquaculture will become something very special. And 
there will be  it will not be under some specific like the if yo u see the changes in the  United 
Nations in the government, everywhere they started building a specific fisheries department,  
fisheries ministry, every day  because t hey know, this is something, it ’s something it ’s revolution 
is happening and in the coming decade, that i s that will be the future. Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:47)  
 
So, if you see this in a world  scenario, in this particular  picture, this water 97 percentage salt 
water and 3 percent freshwater , however, almost 55  percent  of marine capture is coming from 
the salt water and whereas 32 is coming from the inland aquacult ure, 9 percent from  inland 
capture fisheries and total 5  percent of marine aquaculture.  
So, if you see these 9  percent capture and 55  percent  marine  capture total almost 64  percentage  
of capture fisheries and rest is it should be you know 30  36 but it ’s like you know this point 
difference and al l. So, 32 plus around 37 36 37. So, almost two third  is coming from the capture 
fisheries one third  is coming from the culture fisheries this data  is from like 2010 or something. But now things are changing it is al most same same, you know 2018  as we discussed in the last 
graph.  (Refer Slide Time: 19:07)  
 
The same way to discuss about the same, you know, the differen t representation of the  you know 
world capture fisheries and aquaculture  product ion is shown in thi s figure , capture fisheries is  
shown in this you know, thi s yellowish line and this orangish line and culture fisheries are given 
in this bluish line. So, the blue and the light blue light b lue shows the aquaculture  in marine 
water , deep  blue shows the aqu aculture in the inland water. So, it see this curve is increasi ng as 
we discuss right this  capture cultu re fisheries line is increasing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:43)  
 If you see the re gional distribution, China once upon time 1950 1969  and in that period, t hat 20-
year period if you see the  US, the America,  USA and I mean like Asia and Europe has huge 
amount of aquaculture production and all compared to China, but now China is dominating like 
anything . It has s urpassed all the other countries and it is like t he almost beyond reachable ri ght 
now in aquaculture industry.  
But still a that i s why you know India is also focusing on it an d it has a lot of opportunity so, 
really can do that in India scenario India has the capa city to reach that stage, tha t’s why peo ple 
are working on it and government we need a col laboration from philanthropist  we need 
collaboration from NGO ’s, policymakers, normal young po pulation like you. S o, everyone 
should have to come forward and start working on it to make the things you know in a different 
way.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:47)  
 
This is also another interp retation of the graph that the tables that we have seen the let this 
yellow line is showing the population is and this red one is the per capita apparent consumption 
see the popula tion is not increasing in a  like almost in a how to say you know, not in a that the 
fluctuation if you  see the difference in the per capita apparent consumption is much higher than 
the changes in the population. You understand right what I mea n to say and the sa me way this is 
the food and non -food sources, this non-food source uses almost the same, but food source as a food source even food consumption that is also increas ing like anything this value  is increasing 
like anything.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:34)  
 
So, if you ask me that, what is the role of aquaculture in like, in terms of food security, in terms 
of food security o f world all  in a overall in a world scenario. I n general, the total fish production 
is expected to increase from 179 million tonne  in 20 18 to 204 million tonne  by 2030 . It’s It’s the 
number you may seeing like it ’s just nothing like  around 24 , 25 million tonne that ’s nothing. B ut 
it is a lot to see the number of 0 that is there  so it is a lot . And  the projected  aquaculture, it ’s it’s 
to be  like for  109 million ton ne in 2030 to  it can go up to 10 9 million by 2030 as it ’s said like 
almo st 32 percent  higher than the value that is projected in 2018 . Okay!  
It can be in forefront a forefront in meeting t he future demand as well as  demand for food  
deman d for non-food uses like pharmaceuticals and all the chemical uses and all.  Because 
another reason of it, as I d iscussed the growth of capture f isheries has stunted over time . It has 
the capacity , it has a limitation i t cannot go beyond that. Okay!  
Improving the aqua culture su stainably is possible through  what like d efinitely  we have this 
improved farming techniques, we can improve the seed quality, we can improve the breeding 
technology, we can improve the feed that we are supplying,  uh we can introd uce some advanced 
technology to monitor to obse rve to get rid of all the disease to identify to classify them. These are important and this all these things i f we have it all this data, we can definitely manag e them 
in a better way. So , that i s what our go al should be, is n’t it? 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:39)  
 
So, this graph is actually I mean  this particular figure I wan t to give  it you know, just to give you 
some idea about how efficient the fish is compared to any other meat sources. The protein 
retention if  you thin k in cas e of fish, it ’s like 31 percentage,  chicken 21, pig 18, beef 15, energy 
retention 23 percent is fish , 10 percent i n case of uh chicken, 14 percent in case of pig and 27 
percent is good in amount in case of beef . But if you see th e food con version ratio now, it ’s 1.1 
in case of chicken 2.2 . In case of p ig 3. In case of beef , it’s 4 to 10 kg.  
Now , you must be confused , what is food  conversion ratio ? Feed conversion ratio . Feed 
conversion ratio means suppose in the numerator you will be havin g the amount of feed that you 
have supplied . Okay! In the denominator, you have the amount of feed that is actually converted 
into their biomass. Suppose you have supplied 10 kg of say like  11 kg of feed and your supply  is 
having like at the end your fish production is like 10 kg . So, what will be the fed conversion ? 11 
by 10 ,1.1 that is the scenario in case of fish.  
Now, suppose you have supplied 100 kg of feed 100 kg of like you know it ’s a lot of feed you 
have to give  for one cow for the re is 1 kg of b ody mass conversion. So, w hat will be the 
difference 100 sorry 100 say l ike 10 kg of body mass conversion . So, 100 by 10 . So, that ’s why 
10 of  feed conversion ratio is 10 that means it to give 100 kg of feed to a cow they it will only convert to 10 kg of t heir body  mass. S ame way edible meet th ese are some you know, some 
number that you should understand. In future it will b e very handy for you , you know  there will 
be discussing I do  not have to give every time the description all the detailed definit ion of  each 
and everything.  Okay!  
Third fourth one is the edible meat per 100 k g of fe ed out of 100 kg of fe ed that you ar e 
providing, you can have only 61  kg of edible meat from fish, I am saying only because it ’s still 
good enough actually, if you talk about t he beef is like 4  to 10 kg only. S o, the  differen ce is a 
huge,  isn’t it? 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:16)  
 
So, the discussions that we have in the last 20  25 minutes. So , I would say like we need to 
introduce some high-end technology to this  sector to make it to  a better to give a better 
performance or to give more efficient way of culturing these different aquatic species and rare 
them in our hatchery , in our tank , in our pond .  
So, everything eve rywhere like say in your if you a re go ing to onshore practices if you a re going 
to high  sea practices. T his term are maybe new to you onshore , high sea , high sea is like high sea 
just think about it high  seas like far away from the coastal area . Onshore is like not somehow is 
coast al region and all think about it. I nland  means in the land inside the land, we will have a say 
like pond, it is in land culture.  And so, these are the different terms terminologies that you will get accustomed with it at the  
moment you will finish this lecture series. So, technological intervent ion and innovations are 
very much important in aquaculture , design of better faci lities are required. S o, that the fish can 
grow in a more sustainable way , high tech fish farming techniques has to be introduced.  
And the good thing is they are already ther e, the experts have already find out are like 10s of 
different pract ice techniques or like  you know ideas and all . Ideas are already floating in there, 
you just have to capture it you have to grab it and you hav e to introduce it to you in  your own 
field or  you can m ake it further  you know  better just doing your own research. Climate smart 
aqua culture, precision aquaculture and integrated aquaculture .  
Rememb er these three term it will  you will get to see this get  you know, learn I mean like the 
you know hea r this word more frequently in coming deca de. Climate s mart aquaculture, where 
the aquaculture practices will be done without harming without causing any environmental 
disruption or I would say it can it will be carbon neutral or maybe carbon negative in s uch a way . 
Precision aquaculture where you will use the system which give you like each and every, t he 
precision agricult ure involves  your data you will be using your machine le arning or artificial 
intelligence and all . 
This ML AI techniques will be introd uced to the aquaculture it is introduced already in the 
aquaculture a nd even we are working here in IIT Kharagpur as well. W here we are trying to see 
you know, use this machine learning techniques and all to develop the betterment,  you know  the 
develop the  fish in a better way. So, to  identify that if any small animals is there, we try to 
change them we try to put it in t he quarantine tank and try to feed them as soon as possible.  
So, there are different techniques which are already available and the techn ologies are there and 
can be if it can be useful, if you are using in a better way in a perfect you know the wa y or road it 
can give you a  better food definitely in near future. Integrated aquaculture , aquaculture is not to 
be done in it cannot go solo you  can do it. You can do it as well as paddy culture. I t’s called rice  
cum paddy culture , you can do it with a d uck culture with the duckery with the piggery with the 
livestock it is doable an d what will happen the ir excreta  can be utilized to for fis h cultu re, like 
the aquaculture feed and all .  And this way, you know, like you can  you know  increase your economi c return from your farm. 
Small scale fisheries and a quaculture are also gaining attention for their contributi on to food to 
produce food for b illions  of population and achieving zero h unger. So , that i s what our main 
target is.  Right ? Like, you know, you, as of now, I’ll say the fish is considered sometimes, you 
know, very costly product and it i s only mean like, you can go and cap ture it, if you can do that 
one or two pieces or some like . If you go to the  most of the developin g countries, they are not 
getting enough food they are not having it ’s not accessible for them, this f ish and all this meat 
product and all . 
For them, it i s something you know, if they think  about it they dream about it having you know, 
one or two times this fish m eal or chicken meal and all . Whereas some other part of the society 
like us, like we  can even think about it, we it i s not something that we think even . If w e even 
think  about it, because we can achieve it, we can ea sily get the food we can and it ’s not  it’s not 
something that we are bothered with. But for some people there are like out say like m aximum 
portion  of the population are still facing these kinds of issues wher e they cannot approac h to get 
a fish in a meal in a  daily basis.  
So, what we can do this kind of aquaculture practices in a very sustainable and low cost manner  
introducing technology, government s approach and all . It can make the difference, there were a  
lot of peopl e they can involve with it  this protein, this very well needed protein source can be 
made available for each and every citizens of any country. So, that is what the goal is like, you 
know, the aquaculture practice aquaculture as an expert, I w ould also say like that is what we are 
actually working on.  (Refer Slide Time: 31:29)  
 
In conclusion  I would say it this aquaculture is soldering the major responsibility to meet in t he 
growing demand of growing  food demand of  this population explosion t hat is happening all over 
the world and thus ensuring a sustainable g rowth trajectory for aquaculture sector  is very crucial . 
And it only possible we and  you know that there is huge scope of improving this aquaculture 
sector.  
It only possible when we do i t through a conscious technological interventions  and that is what 
will be discussing in  coming weeks. I hope you will get to know a lot  of new technology lot of 
new information from th is 12 weeks lecture series . And so, good let us  explore these possibili ties 
in aquaculture sectors together  in the coming week s.  (Refer Slide Time: 32:28)  
 
So, these are the references you can take a picture or you can go through it. It will help you 
understanding these factor better. If you are interested you can go throu gh it will give you much 
better lot of new information about  this aquaculture sector in general. I hope I can give me some 
basic idea about what I ’m going to discuss  in the last next couple of weeks I mean like next  12 
weeks and this is only the starting I hope you get to know a lot of  very import ant information in a 
coming weeks which will definitely help gather knowledge about this sector and may be you can 
make it helpful for you as well in future,  Okay! thank you so much. See you in the next lecture  
video. 
 