Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  
India n Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture  06 
Transformation  of Open Culture  to Closed  High-Tech Technologies  
Hello  everyone,  welcome  to the next module  of Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology.  So in 
this module  we will be learning  about  the technology  of closed  aquaculture  systems  and in 
this first lecture  I will be discussing  about  the transformation  of open  culture  to closed  high 
tech aquacultu re technology.   
(Refer  Slide  Time  00:46)  
 
 
The concepts  that will be covered  in this particular  lecture  will be the types  of aquaculture  
systems , open  aquaculture  systems , the demerits  of OAS,  the closed  aquaculture  systems  and the key elements  of this CASs, how this this closed  aquaculture  systems  can mitigate  the 
inadequacies  of the open  aquaculture  systems . So to start with we know  the different , various  
types  of aquaculture  depending  upon  the hydrobiological  features , depending  upon  the 
motive  of form ing and the depending  upon  the social  operational  technique  that we will 
incorporate . Okay!  
So, when  we talk about  the in general  the various  cultural  practices  are there  all over the 
world  which  we normally  follow  and which  we normally  consider  as the various types of 
aquaculture  systems  and in generally  is as follows  like first of all the Mariculture,  the 
mariculture  it involves  any kind of aquaculture  practices  which  involved  with the sea water . 
Okay!  
So, it can be mostly  in the sea basin  it can be done ; it can be done  on the open  sea, it can be 
done  on the the bank  of the sea where  we will be doing  like you know  will be digging  a 
proper  canal  and will take the sea water  through  it and so that water  can be utilized  for the 
say like this tide fed farms  and all.  
It can be of flow through  or the raceway  cultures , so in recent  days these  technologies  are 
evolving  like anything  and especially  these  raceways  and all I will be discussing  in details  in 
later lectures  how the raceway  technologies  is actually  revol utionizing  this aquacul ture 
practices  all over the world .  
The third  is the algaculture,  mainly  in the algaculture  mainly  we talk about  the seaweeds  and 
all. So there  are other  aquatic  plants  as well but the seaweeds  are the one of the most  talk 
about  and we normally  try to grow  all over the world  specially  it is the it is considered  for 
their its high nutrient  which  is very much  a utilizable  for the pharmaceutical  and as well as 
the personal  care products  and not only that this seaweeds  are very much  famou s in the south  
like easte rn part of the asia especially  in Japan  and all and even  in the European  region  even  
if you go for the more  western  US and all, there  also people  prefer  seaweeds .  
Even in India  also people  started  favoring  seaweeds  and all as a human consumption , so 
which  is used to make  the sushi  and all you know it ! this Japanese  dish and all. The There are 
types  like integrated  multi -tropic  aquaculture , what  does that mean ? It means  the multi -tropic , 
from  the name  itself  we can say it’s not conc ising on a particular  tropic  of us a food hierarchy  
rather  or the food chain  we can go for the multi -trophic  culture . Okay!  So in case of multi -tropic  cultures  they we can go like there  are various  type of examples  we 
can give the rice and fish culture , the integrated  rice fish duck  culture , the integrat ed poultry  
and fish culture  so there are;  just to name  a few. So this type of culture  procedures  we 
normally  consider  under  the integrated  multi -tropic  aquaculture .  
Inland  pond  culture  which  is very famous  for like thousands  of years  from  the beginning  of 
the human  civilizations . We now it is it that we started  incorporating  very high-tech aerator  
systems  very high-tech intensive  aquaculture  techniques  so to improve  the cultural  benefits  or 
cultural  yield  out of it.  
Recirculating  systems , the recirculating  aquaculture  system  is one of the recent  technology , 
recent  days technology  which  we try to incorporate  you know  to get rid of the water  the loss 
incorporate  because  of the change  of fresh  water  very freque ntly. So what  we can do we can 
go ahead with the treatment  of the aquacu lture waste  water  and then we get it back  to the 
pond  itself  or the tank itself , so this is called  the recirculatory  aquaculture  systems  by which  
we can reduce  the consumption  of the overall  water  from the like overall water demand.  
Then there  comes  the open  net pen or the cage systems , so this open  net pen and the cage 
systems  they can be done  in the say like so any kind of surface  water  bodies  it can be done  in 
the river  systems , it can be done  in the sea water  and I mean  like in the ocean  bodies, open  
sea or maybe  the or in like the offshore  areas  even  we can do it the pen cultures  can be done  
in the by the side in the bank  areas  as well. So I mean  like in general  these  are only a to name  
a few different  kinds  of practices  different  types  of aquaculture  that we normally  have in  
incorporate  in the aquaculture  topic  in general .  
(Refer  Slide  Time  05:42)   
There are open  aquaculture  systems  or OAS  in short , so this actually  involves  the rearing  of 
aquatic  organisms  within  an enclosed  systems , but in natural  environment  okay  say like in 
freshwater  rivers , coastal  marine  regions , brackish  estuaries , etc etc. What we normally  do we 
try to develop  a proper  say cage or pen culture  or say like rope even  stick  is also involved  so 
this kind of structures  we involve  and what  we do we try to use it in the natural  ecosystem  
natural  environment  and try to grow  our target  aquatic  organisms .  
It can be of active  feeding  type, it can be of passive  feeding  type;  active  feeding  type are the 
one which  is like the sea-cage normally  where  we utilize  the floating  mesh  based  cages  which  
actually  anchored  to the seafloor . When  we anchore  this kind of sea cages  and all this cage 
cultures  and all which  we normally  use seabream,  seabass,  the codfish,  tilapia , salmon , shark  
catfish , etc.  
So this kind of fish this kind of this aquatic  or aquatic  animal s, this aquacult ure species  can 
be cultured  in this kind of open  aquaculture  systems . However , the main  difference  is like 
main  thing  is like  here in this kind of culture  with this kind of targeted  aquatic  species  we 
need  to rely on the fish meal  diet we need  to provide  them  with the fish meal  like 
additionally , okay  so that is the thing .  
No though  No matter  it is actuall y cultured  in the natural  ecosystem  but still it is actually  
completely  like not completely  or semi  completely  rely on the the active  feeding  or the 
feeding  the feed that you are supplying  to the system . Second  type is is the passive  feeding,  
all the stick , racks , ropes  or cages  that you can provide  and in this kind of arrangements  what  
happened  the mussels  and the oysters  what  they will do or even  like the seaweeds  and all what  they will do they will just grow  over its surface  and they or what  will happen  they are 
mainly  the filter  feeders . 
What they do they completely  take the water  of the surrounding  places  and they filter  it 
through  their through  the specific  like system  that they have  in their body  and because  of that 
what  will happen  whatever  the plank tonic  organism  that is present  in the water , whatever  the 
amount  of water  they in intake  so they can easily  filter  it out and they can utilize  it as a diet. 
So for this kind of aquatic  species  we do not have to rely on the additional  fish meal  diets .  (Refer Slide  Time  08:23)  
 
 
You can see in this picture  the first one if you see the sea-cage based  open  aquaculture  
systems  where  you see the the cage is actually  moved  to the ocean  floor  and the fish meal  is 
provided  artificially  you can see the number  two so it’s provided  artificially  which  is added  to 
the cages  and this buoyant  tubes  are there  to keep  the cage upload or we sometimes  call it 
floating  tubes  as well, floaters  as well. 
And the fish, you can see the amount  of loss it can cause  the all the fish pieces  and also the 
waste  or the uneaten  feeds  actually  what  happen  they will directly  fall through  the cages , 
because  it is a mesh  kind of structure  there  is no solid  floor . So because  of that there  is a huge 
amount  of loss of uneaten  feed or the fish excreta  that is actually  being  there  which  can cause  
local  environmental  impact  as well.  So we will discuss  about  it in details  what  are the cons part of it what  is the disadvantages  of 
this sea-cage based  OAS , and you can see in the second  figure  like the where  stick,  racks , 
ropes  or the cages  are used where  the oysters  and mussels  can grow  on its surface  on its body  
and see the nutrients  are taken  from  the water  by the organism  itself  and the passive  systems  
of this kind of systems  can occur  can be utilize d in the estuary  region  as well as in the open  
sea region.  What are the demerits  of this open  aquaculture  systems ?  
First of all there  are the open  aquaculture  system  that the demerits  means  whatever  I want  to 
discuss  is the one which  normally  used convent ionally  but nowadays  because  of the scientific  
advancement  we kinda of get rid of all these  problems  and we try to find out the additional  
solutions  out of it. I will be discussing  all all these  things  in later lecture  like what are the 
advancement  in the OAS  systems  even  which  can also reduce  that these demerits  that I will 
be discussing  right  now.  
So first of all in case of OAS  the first is active  feeding  one we required to  we need  to provide  
them  with the fish meal  for feedin g the carnivorous  species ; we need  to provide  it the normal  
meal  also like in case of other  species . The poor conversion  ratio sometimes  even  5 kg of fish 
meal  is required  to breed  only 1 kg of fish because  of the loss of huge  amount  of loss that 
incurs  with this kind of structures  with this kind of  infrastructure s.  
High fish density  results  in the increased  amount  of disease  and the parasite  transmission  and 
because  of we are utilizing  it in a normal  environment  to increase  the yield  we may 
sometimes  normally  go for the intensive  aquacultures  practices  in this kind of OAS’s and all . 
There is a risk of escape  if by any natural  calamity  or by say like any predators  and all  
somehow  if this this came  the neting  material  the mesh  is somehow  getting  like a tear apart  or 
it gets broken  what  will happen  there  is a chance  of loss of huge  quantity  of economic  loss 
can be happen . You know there is the whole  fish school  of fish can escape  through  it and 
because  of that you can it can cost us a lot of economic  loss or economic  disadvantages .  
So, another  unwanted  thing  is like inter breeding  with the wild populations  because  sometime  
these  meshes  are all from  the upper  part of it is open , so sometimes  because  of the flashing  of 
water  or like the waves the  oceanic  waves  or the river  waves  it will there is a chance  it can 
contact  with the wild population  and once  it is in contact  with the wild population  it can inter 
breed  with them  and this inter breed  can cause  harm  to the system  as well. There are a lot of 
case studies  happen  where  this inter breeding actually  caused  the huge  harm  to the local  
ecosystem  and well therefore  we do not expect  it to be happening  in our farm .  Accumulation  of the fecal  waste  whic h reduces  the water  quality  as I discussed  it you can see 
in the picture  only the all the feed that we are supplying  it is not being  completely  eaten  by 
the fish because  it cannot , so some  of them  get, as well as this pickle  waste  pickle  waste  is 
like the fish excrete  or the whatever  aquatic  species  you are targeting  the excreta  of that 
particular  excreta of the excretory  products of the species  that also can has a huge  amount  of 
nitrogen  in it which  can cause  the water  color  to deteriorate , isn’t it? So these  are the 
problems  other  than that disposal  of sticks  and racks  also can be a concern  can b e a matter  of 
concern  in some  areas  which  are normal  practice  in case of open  aquaculture  systems  for 
growing  the mussels and the oysters.  
(Refer  Slide  Time  13:13)  
 
  
So let’s discuss  about  the closed  aquaculture  system , so we know  what  is open  aquacul ture 
systems  like you k now we had an idea about  what  is close  aquaculture  but simply  it is 
nothing  but which  involves  the land-based  breeding  of the aquatic  organisms  in pond , 
raceways  and tanks . It maintains  the control  interface  between  the rare species  and the natural  
environment ; so once  we can maintain  this controlled  interface  between  these  two features  
what  will happen  we can easily  optimize  the benefi ts, we can easily  reduce  the environmental  
impact , we can easily  increase  the yield . So all together  this is a win-win situation  for us. So, 
this in general  we implement  the highly  sophisticated  waste  management  procedures  which  
can filter  the generated  waste  water  and cycle  it back  to the aquaculture  system  itself .  
Recirculatory  aquaculture  system  is a typical  example  of this closed  aquaculture  system . 
Atlantic  salmon , cobia , catfish , tilapia  and European  bass are some  of the example  of the 
aquatic  species  which are normally  reared  in the CAS s like the closed  aquaculture  systems .  
Here  in this picture  I have  shown  you the what  is semi -closed  aquaculture  system  and what  is 
a closed  aquaculture  system.  In case of semi -closed  aquaculture  system  you see the inlet; for 
the inlet  you can see the red pipe which  is actually  used with this conduit  line is actuall y used 
to take the water  from  the sea or the ocean  water  then it is pumped  to the system  and that 
water  that water  is utilized  in the prawn s are actually  normally  cultivated  using  this method 
and this semi -closed  aquaculture  systems  the best example  of semi-close d aquaculture  system  
is tide fed farm  or even  the pump  fed farm .  
We call it pump  fed farm  because  like pump  fed brackish  water  farm  our pump  fed seawater  
farm  so because  this kind of culture  spaces  it needs  certain  amount  of salinity . We know  that sea water  has like around  30 to 35 ppt of salinity , in case of brackish  water  it can be like as 
low as 1 to 2 ppt, as the high as say like  10 ppt of salinity .  
So, that salinity  has to be maintaine d, Okay!  and this kind of aquatic  species  can only be 
susta ined in this kind of when  the medium  has this much  of salinity . So, in order  to grow  
them  in order  to culture  this kind of species  we normally  go for semi -closed  aquaculture  
systems  and the close d aquaculture  system  is you all know  like it’s like a simply  a closed  
place  where  we are supplying  the additional  feed and all and we try to grow  the aquatic  
species  out of it.  
Recirculatory  aquaculture  system  it’s a famous  example  of this closed  aquaculture  systems  
where  we try to grow  intensive  in inten sive natur e the large  amount  of aquatic  species  in a 
small enclosed  space  and we try to treat the water  using  different  methods , I will be 
discussing  soon  what  are the methods  that we normally  use. So by treating  it then we, just  
after the treatment  is done  we just  let the water  come  back  to the pond itself  , comeback to the  
tank or raceway or  the pond  itself , so this is called  the recirculatory  aquaculture  system .  
(Refer  Slide  Time  16:33)  
 
What are the key elements  of CAS,  what  are the key elements  of closed  aqua culture  system s? 
First of all we can monitor  it, we can monitor  the fish health,  we can monitor  the water  
quality , we can monitor  the amount  of feed requirement , we can monitor  the environment  of 
the surrounding  temperature  like even  the temperature  of the air also does matter  so all these  
things  can be monitored  because  of its because in  anyway  it’s in the control led atmosphere , it 
is in the controlled  greenhouse , it’s in a under  control  say like concrete  house  or even  if it is 
in the open  open  air but still it can be controlled  and we can put a roof on it and we can control  the environmental  the environment  of the the surrounding  vicinity  and we can also 
control  the water  or the tank water  or the raceway  water  in this kind of systems .  
Fish handling  is very easy because  the catch  is very easy you can just go for it and just have  a 
small  net and you can easily  catch  it, you don’t have  to worry  about  catching  fish because  of 
its height  it can be larger  in size the pond  or the tank can be larger  and huge  size in in nature  
but still it is doable  the catching  of fish is much  easier  and time to time you can collect  them  
and you can check  their if they detect  the diseases , if they it occurs , you can detect  the growth  
rate and you can have  a proper  understanding  about the your target  aquatic  species  in general . 
Feeding  habits  completely  artificial  that it will depend  in general , so you have  you can go for 
fish meal , you can go for fertilizer , you can go for the other  diet as well other  like feeding  
arrangements  as well.  
The filtration  unit in general  we try to get rid of all the suspended  solids  from  the system  and 
then we go for bio filter  to treat the the nitrogen  species  and try to get rid of all the nitrogen  
species  possible  from  the system . Temperature  control  water heating  system  it requires  I 
remember  I told you about  I think  in previous  to previous  lecture  where  we were  discussing  
about  the geothermal  energy .  
We use the geothermal  energy  in general  or if we cannot  if we cannot  have  the access  to the 
geotherma l energy  what  we can do, we can simply  use a temperature  contr ol atmosphere  or 
temperature  control  greenhouse  so that the temperature  will can be controlled  inside  your 
systems , because  what  happened  even in like  forget about  the temperate  region  there  we 
definitely  have  to have  a water  heating  system .  
Even in region  like us like even in India  also if you go to the northern  part of India  go to the 
northern  part of West Bengal  itself  in these  regions  so what  happen  the temperature  is very 
like incase of  the winter  the temperature  goes down  drastically  so in order  to culture  a 
particular  type of culture  species  year long what  you need  to do you need  to maintain  the 
temperature  for them  to survive  in that system .  
So that is why we need  to go for the controlli ng of temperature  and controlling  of proper  
environment  for your cultural  species  so that’s why you need  to provide  the water  heating  
system . That’s kind of disadvantage  of this type of systems  but just imagine  what  will happen  
in case of open  aquaculture  system , in case of open  aquaculture  system  you just cannot  like 
culture  it at all, in case of close d aquaculture  system  you can at least culture  them , you can at 
least culture  them  providing  some  additional  means  of support , Okay!  but in open  aquaculture  system  the nature  nature  is in super  harsh  in case in the winter  season  because  
especially  in terms  of temperature  and if you go to the temperate  or further  above  in the 
northern  part or say below  in the southern  atmosphere  what  will happen  it is really  not 
possible  for them  to grow  any kind of species  there  because  of the temperature .  
Unless  there  are some certain  species  which  are actually  available  which  can sustain  this 
cyclophilic  temperature  but normally  they are not. Aeration  unit so you need  to provide 
aeration  area that’s actually  one of the nuisance for this kind of stuff this kind of technolog y 
that you need  to provide  aeration  you need  to provide  the dissolved  oxygen  artificially  for 
your culture  species  to grow  otherwise  and also you have  to maintain  that dissolved  oxygen  
all the way long.  
Ozone  and ultraviolet  sterilization  it reduces  the bacterial  and the organic  load sometimes  we 
incorporate  in a recirculatory  aquaculture  system  this kind of ozone  or ultraviolet  sterilization  
which  before  putting that water  back  to the system  so that we can get rid of all the pathogenic  
microorganisms  from  the syste m even  if it grows  we can easily  get rid of it by utilizing  this 
ozone  or this kind of tertiary treatment  units .  
(Refer  Slide  Time  21:30)  
  
So what makes  this CAS  better  than OAS  like this closed  aquaculture  system  better  than the 
open  aquaculture  systems , I think with whatever  I have  discussed  till now you will have  a 
better  idea about  what  exactly  it means  and why I mean  by this particular  slide  that why like 
CAS’s is somehow  better  than the conventional  OAS’s that is available  in existing  models  
that is availab le.  
In general  it maintains  the water  quality  due to the negligible  interference  with the natural  
waterways , you can have  a sophisticate d waste  management  procedures  you can prevent  the 
fish escape  through  to the surrounding  water  which  is one of the majo r issues  which  we 
normally  kinda face in when  we go for the open  aquaculture  system .  
Reduce  the transmission  of fish diseas es and the parasites  because  as I mentioned  like we use 
different  techniques , tertiary  treatment  techniques  to reduce  the microbial  load of the water  or 
the waste  water . So when  we try to reduce  the microbial  load of the unwanted  especially  the 
one we call it the patho gens when  we try to reduce  the amount  of pathogens  or if any 
unwanted  microorganism  in your system  we try to reduce  the load by using  the additional  
means  we use the different  tertiary  treatment  methods  like we can go for ozonation , we can 
go for uv treatm ent, we can go for activated  carbon  filters  and all so like this is just I’m 
giving  some  examples  what  which  normally  use.  
We can go for advanced  oxidation  processes  where  in we can go for we can use the catalyst  
different  photo  catalyst  along  with the UV, so it will further  increase  this reduction  in the 
microbial  load process  from  the process . These are different  technolog ies which  are already  
available  and which  requires  very less amount  of energy  with the advanced  technology  that is already  there  in the market  and it can reduce  the possibility  of transmission  of diseases  and 
parasites .  
See, there may be some  additional  cost involved  with the application  of this additional  
technologies  however  just remember  once  your culture  species  get the disease  or somehow  it 
get the infected  with the disease  in a very short  period  of time you will lose the  it will have  a 
very huge  economic  impact  in your farm.  
That is why we need  to we need  to go for this kind of treatment  system  so tha t it’ll improve  
so there  will be a continuity , like atleast  you will have  a better  control  to your system  to 
reduce  the any possible disease  outbreak  in your farm. It improve  the fish quality  and the 
superior  growth rate because  your each and everything  is well controlled , well optimiz ed and 
it is done  in the scientific  way. If it is done  in scientific  way definitely  it can improve  the fish 
quality  and it can improve  the growth  rate like anything .  
Better food conversion  ratio because  your the amount  of fish feed that you are supplying  the 
amount  of uneaten  or uneaten  fish feed we can reduce  it by providing by  do the proper  
calculation  and we can go for exact am ount of we can  produce  the feed which  is having  exact  
amount  of nitrogen  or phosphorus  that is needed  for the fish to grow .  
We don’t go for additional  amount  of nitrogen , we do not have  to go for additional  amount  of 
feed, because  in open  sea what  happened  there  is the flow of water  and also all most  of the 
feed is getting  uneaten  but in case of close d aquaculture  systems  even  if some  amount  of feed 
get on it and at the initial  stage  of employment  but afterwards  the fish will come  and when  it 
will be hung ry it will come  and have  that food, like I am just giving  you a scenario  so by this 
way the food convers ion efficiency  can be improved .  
It reduce  the dependency  on the therapeutics  and different  kind of antibiotics  and all 
whenever  this kind of open  aquaculture  systems  they kind of, how to say um sorry say  closed  
aquaculture  systems  and reduce  the need  for these  all the systems  because it can reduce  the 
possibility  of disease  outbreak  and all and when  there  is a decrement  or the like  when  you can 
reduce  the possibility  of disease  outbreak  and all so definitely  it can help you out  with the  it 
can give you a better  average  better  adva ntage  than the open  aquaculture  syste ms.  
So to conclude  it the open  aquaculture  system  has been  like most  preferred  aquaculture  
systems  over the years , but however  it possesses  high environmental  risk as we discussed  due 
to its direct  contact  with the natural waterways .  Thus , the focus  has now shifted  towards  the closed  aquaculture  systems  mostly , however , I 
am telling  you there  are recent  studies  there  are recent  researchers  going  on even  on open  
aquaculture  system  also to make  it more  viable , to make  it more  environmentally  benign  so 
that it will not cause  this much  environmental  risk or it will  still it can give the proper  the 
benefit  that we are looking  for. Okay ! 
The closed  aquaculture  systems  it involve  highly  sophisticated  waste  management  systems  
for solid  waste  removal , biological  filtration , thereby it can improve  the water  quality  and 
making  the water  reusable  several  times  before  being  discarded .  
So it can reduce  the water  consumptions  like anything  but see still I cannot  compare  in this 
partic ular matter  with the open  aquaculture  system  becau se open  aquaculture  systems  we are 
not utilizing  the water  at all, isn’t it? but in terms  of waste  management  it is much  better , the 
CAS  is much  better  than the open  aquaculture  systems  than all. Okay  
So all together  there  are pros and cons for both of the systems  but you need  to understand  
now the science  has advanced  enough  and CAS  is not only closed  aquaculture  systems  but 
even  open  aquaculture  systems  are also coming  forward  with a huge  possibility  of getting 
huge  amount  of economic  return  with a high production  yield  and closed  aquaculture  system  
definitely  it goes a long way now in terms  of scientific  output  and all.  
(Refer  Slide  Time  28:01)  
 
So these  are the references  that I have  used you can take a look on this so that you will have  a 
better  idea about  the discu ssions  that we have . Thank  you so much  see you on the next 
lecture .  