Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  - 15 
Seaweed  Culture;  Pearl  Culture  
Hello  everyone.  Welcome  to the NPTEL  online  certification  course  on advanced  aquaculture  
technology.  I am Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick,  from  agricultural  and food engineering  
department  IIT Kharagpur . So, in this particular  module,  I will be discussing  on the seaweed  
culture  and the pearl  culture.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:46)  
 
So the concepts  that are will be covered  is the global  statistics  on this particular  scenario.  
Macroalgae  or the seaweeds,  its culture  methods , oyster  farming , and the pearl  culture  and the 
parameters  affecting  the pearl  culture  and their different  culture  methods.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  01:03)  
 
So, if you see the global  statistics  on the ornamental  species,  fish production  and the aquatic  
algae,  so the seaweed  or the macroalgae  production  in the last, then like almost  20 years,  it 
almost  tripled  from  2000 . Data  from  2000  it is like 10.6 million  tones  to 32.4 million  tones  on 
the in the year of 2018.  And the projection  rate for there  is an according  to the scientists  and the 
researchers  from  all over the world  for their, for them  the the idea is by the end of 2030 , it can go 
further,  almost  5 times  increment  can be witnessed  in this particular  sector . 
An ornamental  species  and fish production  if we can see, if we can compare , if we see almost  
more  than one third  of the fish production , one third  of the aquatic  production . Almost  one third  
of the aquatic  production  aquatic  species  production  is now consumed  now relates  to the aquatic  
algae  production , especially  the macroalgae  production.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  02:11)  
 
The macro algae  or the seaweed , it actually  differs  from  the micro algae  in terms  of morphology  
and life cycles . And it used like different  type of culture,  methods  and purposes  are are there  for 
the production  of this macro algae  and all; and they are actually  extremely  different.  It is 
normally  used for the human  consumption  from  fresh  and also it can be in dried  form.  Fresh  one 
I think  like Japanese  sushi  and all it is very famous . If you go to the eastern  part of Asia, this 
consump tion of seaweed  is very common.  
Even  in the US also in the western  world  also now people  are started  consuming  seaweed  in the 
different  dishes ; and it is considered  as a very delicio us and very rich in nutrient , in terms  of like 
diet preparation  and all. It is used for the medicinal  purposes,  it is used for the soil conditioner  
and the fertilizers  I have  already  discussed  in details  in last lecture.  It used for the gelling  the 
hydrocolloid  productions  and all. So, what  are these  hydrocolloids?  This agar,  alginate  et-cetera . 
So, which  are actually  now being  used for this, agar can be used from  the red and this alginate  
can be used from , can be found , can be easily  collected  or recovered  from  the brown  algae . 
So, these  seaweeds  which  are benthic  in nature , normally  grow  in the solid  substrate  like rock 
and all. But, however , most  of the species  now in we can easily  farm it, in a freely  floating  or 
suspended  in the water column  in the liner linings.  (Refer Slide  Time:  03:46 ) 
 
So, reasons  why seaweed s are excellent  for aquaculture?  First of all, they are robust,  they can 
deal with the daily  fluctuation  of temperature  and the salinity ; and they can tolerate  the 
desiccation , means  the dryness.  So, these  seaweeds , we can use it can it can it can, we can easily  
sustain  this and seaweeds  can easily  sustain  a major  changes  in the environmental  parameters ; 
and which  will definitely  be a positive  point,  a positive  side for production  on the seaweed.  And 
which  will give us a additional  benefit  when  we go for the farming  of seaweed  in our aquaculture  
farm . 
So, definitely  we do not have  to worry  about  much;  because  if for some  reason , there  is a minor  
environmental  changes . It will sustain , it will not just wash  out like other  aquatic  sensitive  
aquatic  species.  What  are the limiting  factors?  Definitely  the light, you have  to have  a proper  
ample  amount  of luminosity  have  to provide  them , so that the light is ample  enough  for them  to 
grow.  For them  to photosynthesize,  the quality  and the quantity  changes  with depth  definitely.  
So, you have  to you have  to make  sure that you are maintaining  a shallow  depth  or you are 
culturing  in in a shallow  depth  of ocean  for the cultur ing of these  kinds  of seaweeds.  
Seaweed s adapt  through  changes  in amount  on the types  of primary  chlorophyll  and accessory  
accessory  pigments . So, the nutrients  that are very important  factors ; nitrogen  and phosphorus  
sources  has to be there  in the dwelling  area.  So, this is actually  very much  easy once  we go for 
this multi -trophic  aquaculture  systems . And in case of this integrated  multi -trophic  aquaculture  systems , what  we do? We can grow  fish along  with the seaweed.  So what  will happen ? The fish 
it will produce  a either  excreta  or uneaten  fish. 
It can easily  convert  into the beneficial  nutrient  that is new that is needed  for the seaweed  or any 
kind of micro algae  or macro algae  to grow . And it shows  the opportunistic  behavior , 
opportunistic  behavior  by storing  the nutrients  when  available  and they can; so that is also a good  
thing.  So, for long say suppose  in between  the farming  procedures  for a certain  moment  of time,  
you cannot  provide  the system  with the ample  amount  of nutrients.  But, the amount  of nitrogen  
and phosphorus  that they have  stored  previously  during  the ample  supply  of those  nutrients,  they 
can easily  sustain  for a couple  of days,  a couple  of weeks  based  on the type of the species . 
So, that is the good  thing about  this kind of culturing,  this kind of farming  practices;  that it does 
not require  much  of a human  intervention . Even some  if due to some  calamity,  you cannot  
provide  them  with the nutrient  or with the ample  amount  of inputs ; they can still survive  till the 
next application  or the till the next supply  of inputs.  Temperature  is obviously  an important  
factor  for their growth.  So, based  on the cultures  species  and all, they can they have  their certain  
variability  in the temperature,  they can sustain  at different  temperature . And based  on that we try 
to incorporate  optimal  condition,  if you are growing  it in a tank; and we have  to try to put them  
in a proper  optimal  condition , so that they will they can easily  sustain . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  07:05)  
 Major  culture  groups , these  phaeophyta  like the brown  seaweed ; example  of which  is like 
Saccharina ; I think  you guys  know  about  kelp.  Kelp  is the one which  is like very famously  used 
all over the world  and kelp has a drastic  application  in terms  of human  food like human  
consumption , in terms  of pharmaceutical , in terms  of personal  care products  also. So, there  are 
different  kinds  of chemicals  or the byproducts  that can be recovered  from  the kelp or the 
Saccharina ; and that can be used for this byproduct  recovery , and that can be used for these  
different  industries  and all. 
There  is another  type of cultur e groups  which  called  rhodophyta  or the red seaweeds.  So, the 
example  of it is like this Porphyra  and all. There are third  but not the last like this Chlorophyta;  
there  is another  type of seaweed ; the green  seaweed  we call it. So, famous  example  of it is ulva 
or sea lettuce . I think  you guys  have  seen sea lettuce  or maybe  what  sea lettuce.  The sea lettuce  is 
actually  a type of this macro algae,  it is a type of seaweed,  it is a green  seaweed.  It is a chloro,  it 
is the chlorophytes , it comes  under  the group  of Chlorophyta . So, the culture  species  for culture  
methods  are there  for it depends  on the different  type of species . 
In general,  all these three  major  groups  you should  remember . And in suppose  in Indian  context,  
if you want  to go ahead  with farming  your own farm , or you want  to provide  the technology  to 
the to your customer  who is going  to farm  in the seaweed , and try to get some  byproduct  out of 
it. You have  to make  sure that what  type of seaweed  is actually  good  enough  for the production  
of which  target  product  that you are targeting.  And in Indian  context,  there  are certain amount  of 
almost  744 type of species  which,  if I remember  it correctly  are available  based  on the data given 
by the regulatory  bodies  in India.  
So, they they based  on their data,  almost  744 species  of seaweeds  are available  in Indian  coastal  
regions,  which  are their native  regions . So, once  when  they are having  these  native  regions , so 
definitely  they will grow  more  easily.  So, whenever  you are you will try to grow  some  seaweed.  
In this particular  regions,  we do not want  to go for the exotic  seaweed  production . You try to find 
out the production  of the seaweed  which  is native  in nature,  so that it can easily  sustain , easily  
the produ ction  rate will be much  higher.  
The culture  methods , in general  4 type of culture  methods  are there.  In general , we normally  use 
it. First is long-line culture , it is like long main lines  will be there ; from  there , they will be like 
the subsidiary  lines  and all, where  they will be cultured  in a in a long line methods.  I will show  you how it looks  like. Then , there  is net culture , then there  is pond  culture  on the in a stagnant  
water  bodies . And there  there  come , then there  comes  the tank culture , where  it will be like, it is 
like regular  the water  will be moving , and so there  it will be culture.  
So, long line culture  in general,  we do it in a natural  environment;  net culture  also we do it in a 
natural  environment.  Pond  culture  definitely  in enclosed  place  in a landlocked  body  water  body,  
and the tank culture  is also enclosed  space.  But, we provide  certain  amount  of flow velocity  for 
them  to for this speci fic type of seaweed  to sustain.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:33)  
 
See, this is a long line culture . It actually  considers  more  than 80 percent  of the seaweeds  that is 
available,  seaweed  culture,  the harvest,  the farming  that is practiced  all over the world.  In this 
kind of long-line cultures , we have  this long liners  where  these  are. You see these  floaters  and 
sinkers  are there,  where  because  of the sinkers,  there  is these  are in sync in this. In this lines,  we 
have  tight tied the seed,  we tied the seed in that long lines ; and after a certain  point  of time,  say 
45 or 50 days in general,  that is a standard  duration , for which  they grow . 
After they go, they mature  and after then we culture  them.  So, this is like an old, this is a long-
line culture,  which  is a very famous.  This is a very most  abundantly  used process  in case of 
culturing  of any kind of mostly  most  of the macro algae ; especially , the Saccharina  or kelp and 
kelp.  So, this Saccharina  annual  production  of Saccharina  is around  at 80 to120  ton per hectare  
that is possible  and it cost a lot. So, if you can produce  in your farm  in a sufficient  amount  of Saccharina  has a huge  amount  of benefits  economic  benefits,  you you a lot of economi c return  
you can get out of it; so, it is really  needed . 
In Indian  context  it is really  needed,  people  should  really  think  about  it. People  should  really  
come  in the front  and start working  on this kind of business  strategies ; and think  about  the 
business  strategy  and go ahead  with the culture  of this kind of seaweeds  and all in India.  Almost  
1 lakh 50 to 3 lakh kelp plants  can be grown  in a 1 hectare  area with an areal  density  of around  
15 to 30 individuals  per meter.  And so this is based  on the data given  by the Mohamed,  2013.  
There  are details  of the paper  that you can, I will show  you at the end of the lecture  material.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:34)  
 
Second  is the net culture . It is also normally  done  in the natural  water  bodies  only, where  it is 
suitable  for small  to medium  sized  red algae  cultures,  especially  the nori and all, so porphyra  and 
all. So, this nori in general  if see it is like 30 to 60 ton per hectare  of annual  production  can be 
there.  So, this actually  this net culture  is also like three  different  types.  First one, is it you see it is 
a fixed  a pillar  methods . They  are like a lot of pillars  one after another.  So in that pillars, those  
nets are connected.  So, over the net, we try to grow  the this nori or this kind of red algae . 
So, this is one type of culturing  methods.  The second  is the semi -floating  methods,  where  there  
will be it is actually  floating  plus there  are some  additional  pillars  are provided  to give it some  
additional  strength.  And third  one is the floating  method  you see the figure -C is the completely  floating  in nature.  So, it has connected  it is connected  from  one side, like from  the both the side 
only, there  is no intermediate  pillars  to support  its weight.  
So, this kind of culture  is this based  on the type of species , type of red algae  or whatever  the 
algae  that we are targeting,  like when  seaweed  that we are targeting , we have  this three  different  
methods  of net culture . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:55)  
 
Then,  there  comes  the pond  culture . Pond culture:  from  the name  itself  you can understand , so 
pond . In general , we try to, in general,  it has a stagnant  water  body  in general . So, this (glacia)  
Gracilaria,  so this Gracilaria  this tenuistipitata  so they normally  grow  in these  still ponds . So, for 
the growth  of this Gracilaria,  so we go ahead  with the go ahead  with the pond  culture , where  
there  is like we try to go for as stagnant  water  body  as possible.  How  much  yield  it is possible?  
Almost  9 ton, you can see when  it is a stagnant  water  body,  when  it is like a pond.  So, why do 
not we go for this IMTA this as we discussed?  
So, this IMTA  in this in case of this multi -trophic  aquaculture  systems  what  happened ? There,  
we can grow  the grass  shrimps  or the crab along  with the Gracilaria.  So, what  it will do? First, it 
will introduce  you with a high level  of yield , which  will give you high economic  benefit . Plus,  
you can properly  how to manage  eco the environment,  you can properly  manage  the feeding  
requirement,  because  whatever  the excess  amount  of nitrogen  that is generated  in the shrimps  by 
the shrimps  or the crab will be consumed  by the Gracilaria  and all because  of their development.  So, by this way we can introduce  very standard  techniques  standard  farming  practice.  So, and it 
will increase  the overall . If you see in case of, if you only produce  the Gracilaria,  it will give you 
9 ton Gracilaria  per hectare  of per hectare  of your farming  land or farming  pond.  In case of if you 
do it this IMTA,  you can have  this say 9 ton of Gracilaria  along  with the 6.3 ton of grass  shrimp  
and crab in the same  field.  So, it will definite ly increase  your production  is’nt it? 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:53)  
 
So, the fourth  one is the tank culture,  where  we have  this complete  tank culture . We can have  a 
partial  tank cultural.  These  tanks  we can provide  it in the middle  of a pond  also, in the middle  of 
a thing.  So, when  we can have  these  kind of cultures,  we can have  it separately  in a completely  
inland  pros inland  acquisitions  techniques ; so, where  you can have  those  tanks  and which  have  
continuous  flow. You can maintain  this partial  culture  is in general  the commercial  cultivation.  
Juveniles  are produced  in tanks  before  the seeding . 
So, what  happened  because  of commercial  kelp cultivation?  We try to produce  the juveniles  in 
the tank first, then we put it in the natural  environment  in either  in net culture , either  in the long-
liners.  So, that is why it is called  a partial  culture  and then there  is possibility  of complete  
culture . Complete  culture  where  the from  the initial  stage , from  the seed to the juvenile  to the 
mature  stage;  all the stages  are being  all the whole  farming  is done  in the tank. So, that is done in 
case of concrete  culture.  Tank  size in general,  it varies  drastically  from  the point  of view  of market  expectations , from  the 
point  of your species  very variety  that you are using.  From  just remember  whenever  you will be 
designing  in aquaculture  farm, you first need  to study ; first need  to think  about  the target  species . 
Whether  that target  species  is actually  viable  for production  or not; once you target  the species,  
you go for the market  study . Whether  the market  that is available  in the near vicinity  or even  
they exporting , export  market  is good  enough  and will give you the economic  return  or not; 
based  on that you design  your farm.  
Once  you have  design  your farm, you go ahead  with the additional ; after you design  your farm, 
after you have  your product , after you have  your market ; then go for USP. What  is the USP of 
your product?  What  will be the something  value  addition  of your product , think  about . And then 
you go ahead  with the further  business.  So, that is how your your thinking  should  be like when  
you go for any farming  practices;  that is how you should  go ahead  gradually . Think  about  from  
the scratch  to the business  point  of view , or scratc h to the research  point  of view.  In general , this 
tank,  depth  can vary 20 up to from  20 to 30 centimeter.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:20)  
 
And these  tanks  can be used for culturing  several  types  of seaweeds,  the critical  factors  that you 
should  we should  consider  when  we will be designing  a tank system s. First of all, irradiance.  
What  is the irradiance?  Simply  the light densities.  Because  it suppose  you are designing  a tank 
which  like say a 60 centimeter  height,  so defin itely after 30 to 40 centimeters , the light will not penetrate.  So will it be beneficial?  No. Because  why to go ahead  with the further  depth  when  the 
light the sunlight  cannot  penetrate . When the sunlight  cannot  penetrate,  so it will definitely  not 
be it is not be a dwelling  zone  for your culture  species ; so, just no we will not go for it. 
So, the pH is another  factor  because  based  on pH, you have  to, you can what  you can do? You 
can do the neutralizing  phenomena.  If you do not know  what  is neutralization,  you can search  for 
it in Google ; it is very important  criteria,  important  phenomena  and important  system  that we 
normally  use process , that we normally  use for the treatment  of water  neutralization.  Based  on 
we try to balance  the pH that is called  neutralization ; based  on the alkali  treatment , acid 
treatment,  we do this kind of neutralization.  
So, based  on the target  species,  target  pH and also we do this kind of. Sometimes  we additionally  
add some  buffers  to maintain  the pH that is also one type of neutralization  technique.  So anyway,  
so think  about  try to learn  about  what  is neutralization  and how it works;  it will give you some  
additional  idea about  how why pH is important , and how pH is regulated  in any farming  
practices.  Use of fertilizers  and availability  of carbon  dioxide ; definitely  use of fertilizer  is very 
important,  because  unless  until there  is not ample  amount  of fertilizer  is available.  What  do you 
mean  by fertilizer,  especially  nitrogen  and phosphorus?  
There  are other  major  elements , there are other  minor  elements,  those  are obviously  important;  
but these  two are the major  factor  nitrogen  and phosphorus . You have  to supply  this nitrogen  and 
phosphorus  no matter  what.  How  it can be how it can be provided  by having  this multi -trophic  
aquaculture  as I told?  
You can farm  your other  aquatic  species,  especially  the fish and shrimps  et-cetera  along with this 
seaweed . Or you can just provide  it in this simply try to have  it in estuaries;  because  in estuary  
region  in the brackish  water.  There  is a high chance  of having  high amount  of nutrients  and 
availability  or try to grow  it in the place  in the coastal  regions , where  the some  of the; there  is a 
high chances  of getting  a high amount  of nutrients  available  in that region.  
So, you have  to check  the (waste)  to check  the water  quality  time to time. And just to make  sure 
that the fertilizers  are available,  whether  it be natural  or whether  it be artificial . In case of any 
deficiency  in the natural  fertilizers,  you have  to supply  it artificially . And the availability  of carbo n dioxide  it is very simple,  definitely  the carbon  dioxide  is like it is like the need  need  for 
them  to grow , for they will consume  the carbon dioxide.   
So what  you can do? You can simply  to increase  the carbon  dioxide  in case of, especially  when  
you go for the natural  ecosyste m, natural  habitat . In that natural  habitat  definitely  carbon  dioxide  
is not a big deal;  definitely  there  there is a chance  of having  huge  amount  of carbon  dioxide ; but, 
the ample  amount  of carbon  dioxide.  
But, sometimes  there  is a proble m we faced  where  there  is, we call this ocean  acidification.  So, 
sometimes  what  we try to do? We try to provide  it with some  additional  material  like limestone s 
and all, limestone  powder  and all. Why  to provide  limestone  powder  in the seawater?  So, it will 
increase  the carbon  dioxide  intake  rate and it also it will tackle  with the ocean  acidification  issue.  
So, that is the major  problem  nowadays  in the ocean.  So, we can do, we can artificially  increase  
the ocean  alkalinity.  So, by why by means  of providing  the limestones  by means  of providing  the 
other  other  elements ; so that it will increase , it will react  with the carbon  dioxide . 
And not only react  with the carbon s it will uptake  the more  amount  of carbon  dioxide  from  the 
resource ; and not only that it will somehow  manage  the ocean  alkalinity  as well.  So, that is one 
way of capturing  carbon  dioxide . But, that the all the carbon dioxide  that has been  captured  in 
this particular  sense  is actually  been  converted  into; it actually  reacts  with the ocean  acidity  and 
converted  with alkalinity , but, that is a different  issue.  In general,  this is one of the process  by 
which  we try to grab more  amount  of carbon  dioxide  from  the atmosphere , and try to fix it in the 
in our dissolve,  increase  the dissolved  carbon  dioxide  concentration  in the water ; by which  we 
can the plant  can consume  that carbon  dioxide  as well from  the system.  
Very  high annual  productivity  are possi ble in this in for some  systems,  especially  if you go for 
this intensive  tank microalgical  macro algae  algal  cultures . As high as almost  more  than 100 gram  
of dry weight  per day is possible.  So, the more  the production , the more  the economic  return  that 
you will get from  your farm,  so, that is good;  that is why I always  mentioned , think  about  it. 
Whenever , you will be designing  a farm, go and talk to the experts ; and design  it very 
scientifically  as minutely  as possible . 
In this particular  subjects,  in this particular  course  I can, I can give more  details  about  all these  
designs  and engineering  specifications.  But, we have  a limitation  in times  and I cannot  go. I have to cover  all those  things,  so I am not going  into more  details  of these  things.  So, but provided  an 
opportunity  in maybe next later in other  subjects;  I will discuss  more  in details.  Or you can reach  
out to me for discussing  about  how to go for this designing  of particular  farms. Very maintaining  
the high stocking  density  is possible  in this kind of culture  systems . Almost  2 to 5 grams  of fish, 
fresh  weight  per liter or more  than 1 kg of fresh  weight  per square  meter  is possible  in this kind 
of tank system  and higher  tank system . 
Pulse  feeding  of nutrients  at night  times  for species  capable  of luxury  uptake . So, that is a that is 
a additional  benefit . In the night  time also if you provide  artificial  illuminations , like 
luminescence  maybe  in like artifi cial irritation  or light or you are providing . Because  of that, you 
have  to somehow  replicate  or somehow  mimic  the natural  sunlight . And if you can provide  it 
with the LED  system  to your seaweeds  and all, they will still continue  doing  the photosynthesis.  
What  does that mean?  The more  they will do photosynthesis , the more  they will consume  the 
carbon  dioxide ; and more  they will convert  into the available  bioma ss. 
So, simply  but, so there  are scientific  limitations  for this kind of processes  as well,  I am not 
going  into details.  So, in general  the more  amount  of sunlight  is available,  the more  amount  of 
photosynthesis  will take place.  And simply  the biomass  conversion  will take. The biomass  
conversion  means  what?  They  will get matured  very fast. So, once  they will get matured  very 
fast, it will definitely  increase  your economic  return , it will increase  the overall  output  of your 
farming  system.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  25:55)  
 
So, that is what  all about  the seaweeds  and all; so, I can discuss  more  in details  later on. So, in 
general,  the oyster  farming’s next topic  that will be discussing  today  is in brief  is about  the 
oysters.  So, oysters  can be of different  types  like edible  ones like cupped  oysters  or flat oysters.  
It is very delicious,  believe  me it is it is very delicious  to have  the oysters.  And that is why it is 
becoming  very famous  seafood  matter , and it is very exotic.  Not in terms  of why I call it exotic , 
not in terms  of from  it can only be done  outside  in a specific  temperature . 
But, also because  of its high nutritious  value  and all, and it is considered  as a very standard  food 
practice  in Western  culture.  And nowadays  in India  also we are started  having  these  oysters.  It is 
there  for long,  but this cultur e is getting  bloomed  easily ; it is very fast nowadays.  Next  is the 
pearl  oyster.  Pearl  oysters  are the one which  is and tropical  in nature  or subtropical  in nature,  you 
cannot  normally  find it in the temperate  region  was much . But, now they are growing  it in 
artificial  environment.  So, normally  they are tropical  or subtropical  marine  species  according  in a 
range  of habitats  from  silty sea beds to the coral  reefs.  
So, this inner  shell  layers  with the nacreous  layer  which  we call is very lustrous ; and is this is the 
basis  of the pulp production.  In case of oysters , this nacreous  layer  is the one where  they produce  
this instead  we put the nucleus ; and there we have  this pearl  production.  The pearl  oysters  are a 
very high value  product  species;  I do not have  to say what  is the reason . Pearl  it is one of the 
precious,  one of the finest  of the natural  gemstones  that is available ; or like natural  not gemstones  like nature.  I mean  like jewelry  products  and all can be made  out of it; and there  are a 
lot of other  bene fits also, not only the jewelry.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  28:04)  
 
So, in case of long-line pearl  from  if you see the water  surface , the buoys  or the floats  are there . 
Then, there  is a sinkers  and the ropes  are connected  with the sinker  or the anchored  to the bottom  
of the sea, or bottom  of the water  body,  where  it wherever  you are culturing.  There,  this pearl  
nets you see the nursery,  the pearl  nets how it looks  like, then when  it becomes  at a certain  stage , 
it goes convert . We put it in a lantern  nets, where  it is work  as a grow out pond  for them , grow out 
region  for them.  
Then , we transfer  to the pocket  nets, where  actually  this pearl  farm  the proper  farming  of until 
the maturation  stage , we put it in that pea-nut pearl  pocket  nets. So, there  from  there  we collect  
those  pearls  and we we collect  those  pearl  oysters;  and we use it for use the try to harvest  the 
pearls  from  there . So, there  are they normally  are the filter  feeding  species;  so, they normally  
obtained  the nutrition  from  the fine particulate  organic  matter.  So, this POMs  this fine particulate  
organic  matter  level  strongly  influenced  the growth  rate and the final size that it will attain.  
So, it can pump  the water  through  their gills at the rate of almost  thousand  liter per day; so, it is it 
is really  a lot, it is really  a lot. And not only that it will it will actually  somehow  help the 
environment  to get rid of those  oyster,  to get rid of those  suspended  particles  from  the 
atmosphere , from  the surrounding  ecosystem.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  29:41)  
 
The parameters  that affect  the pearl  culture  are the sheltered  bays or the shallow  coastal  waters  
are normally  ideal  for pearl s culture.  Actually,  they offer  a very good  protection  to culture  
struc tures  like rafts or the cages.  Environmental  parameters  that are very important  for pearl  
culture  are the temperature  20 to 25 degrees  Celsius ; I told you like temper  like tropical  and 
subtropical  water  bodies  are best. Salinity  a wide  range  up to 24 to 50 percent  is preferred it 
prefers  the high salinity.  
The bottom  like gravelly  bottoms  are ideal  for them ; the depth  almost  optimum  of 15 meter . Slit 
load, they prefer  the clean  water;  it is like the as the clean  water  is possible  is there . And they 
from  there  itself  they can consume  the particular  organic  matter  is not a big deal.  The water  
current  is sufficient  enough  for the oxygen  replenishment ; because  it has to be a little bit ample  
enough  for them  to have  they; because  they are filter  feeders.  So, for them  to have  a sufficient  
amount  of oxygen , you need  to have  a very small  amount  of water  current  availability  for the 
oxygen  replacement . 
Or you have  to supply  it with additional  means;  you go ahead  with the filter  aerators and all . 
Primary  productivity  of the water  is very important , because  they they actually  consume s those  
planktons  and all to go ahead  with the; they are the primary  producer . So, that that that is what  I 
mean  that is what  it means  here by the primary  product ivity.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  31:17)  
 
In general , the rearing  methods,  there are raft cultures,  rack culture,  on-shore  tank culture , long-
line culture , on-bottom  culture.  We have  already  discussed  all these  things  like how how it looks  
like; so, you might  have  already  have  an idea how it looks.  If you see the raft culture , you can 
have  a bamboo  wrapped , which  like this square  pattern  and then or the rectangular  in pattern . 
You can put the linings  along  with it and you can have  the raft culture , you can see the rack. 
These  racks  are provided  in this rack of pearl  which  are provided , and will hang  through  this 
racks  in a therefore  for the high precision  pearl  culture . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  31:57)  
 We have  this conclusion like to conclude  this lecture;  I would  say like this dried  and the fresh  
foods  and the food eating  food-gelling  ingredients  are the two drivers  for the seaweed  
production.  A significant  advantage  of bivalves  for aquaculture  is that they filter  feed on fine 
suspended  particles  with their gills,  which  will increase  the environmental  sustainability , and 
also your production  rate. Does  they do not require  any additional  feed during  their growout  
phase.  This is sustainable  in terms  of production  as well as the ecosystem  services.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  32:33)  
 
So, what  is the takeaway  message  from  this lecture?  The aquaculture  of seaweeds  and the 
bivalves  are highly beneficial  to the habitat  to this ecosystem,  to the human , for human  economy  
or the country's  economy ; for definitely  to eradicate  the unemployability  issues . It is it is actually  
the future , it is like people  should  really  think  about  it and find a way to go ahead ; and go and 
start your business  on these  kinds  of sectors.  This is blooming  in future  like anything , the 
production  of these  organisms,  help in creating  the aquaculture  water  as well as earning  a better  
livelihood  as a livelihood  as I just mentioned.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  33:17)  
 
So, these  are the references  that I have  taken  the same  materials  from , so maybe  you better  go 
ahead  and visit them  to get some  more  knowledge  on this sector.  Or definitely  in that case,  I am 
always  available ; you can reach  me out with the video  with the mail-id. So, thank  you so much ; 
that is all for this lecture.  See you in the next lecture.  Thank  you. 