Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture -13 
Mariculture  
Hello,  welcome  everyone.  My name  is Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick;  I am from  the 
agricultural  food engineering,  department  of IIT Kharagpur.  Welcome  to the course  advanced  
aquaculture  technology.  Today,  this is the third  lecture  of module  three  farming  systems;  and 
today  I will main ly be discussing  about  the mariculture.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:44)  
 
So, the concepts  that I will be covering  today  in this particular  lecture  is the demand  for seafood , 
opportunity  set for the marine  aquaculture , the types  of mariculture , the siting consideration,  
environmental  risks  and the possibilities  for mitigation  techniques ; and advantages  and 
drawbacks  of RAS  that is recirculating  aquaculture  system  and offshore  aquaculture.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  01:04)  
 
So, in general  we know  that aquaculture  which is responsible  for almost  50 percent  of the share  
of the seafood  production  for human  consumption . More  like it is it is very recent  study  actually,  
but previously,  it was much  less than that. Even 10 years  back also it was not more  than 20 
percent  of the total seafood  production ; but now it almost  equals  to the capture  fisheries  which  is 
like 50 percent  of the rest of the seafood  production;  and which  I have  discussed  in the very first 
module.  The seafood  demand  it is increasing  with increase  in population  definitely  and definitely  
for this new trend  of healthy eating  that we are having.  
So because of that, we try to be more  prone  of prone  to eating  seafood  based  products  and all. 
And it has actually  a very high health  benefits  because  of the major  source  of omega  3 and 5 
fatty acids.  Moreover,  the food producti on must  increase  by at least 70 percent  to what  it is right  
now to feed the projected  population  of around  9.7 billion ; and to what  right  now it is I think  7.4 
billion  people  in 2022.  And it will it can increase  up almost  around  10 billion  by by the end of 
2050.  To sustainably  achieve  this goal,  the seafood  sector s especially  the aquaculture  it, it has to 
play a very crucial  role. 
And the main  way forward  is the blue revolution  in harmony  with the marine  ecosystem.  So, the 
blue revolution  is the one that we are right  now in in this era and the Government  of India  is also 
putting a lot of effort  for this blue revolution.  We have  different  technologies  related  to the blue revolutions  and all and also its harmony  with the marine  ecosystem;  not disrupting  the existing  
ecosystem  or not disrupting  the environment  in general  in a general.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  02:50)  
  
So, in case of like, based  on the growth  in population , based  on the increase  in the middle  class  
income  and the consumers,  they are mainly  prone  to eating  the seafood s and the predictability  
definitely  the desire  for consistent  quality  product  year-around;  and also the increase  in the 
quality , volatility  and the scarcity  of the wild product.  People  are more  prone  to go for 
aquaculture  based  sea products ; so, and also the taste and preferences  as we already  discussed  
and the food safety  definitely . 
It is there  is a major  concern  regarding  the frequency  and the severity  of food safety  incidents  all 
over the world , and people  are more  prone  to go for the natural  products ; so natural  seafood  are 
becoming  a very high demand  right  now,  all over the globe.  So, based  on all these  criteria’s  and 
all, I can we can definitely  say that the (defini)  the demand  for the seafood  is increasing;  it is in a 
very rising  trend  right  now.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  03:46)  
 
And there  are different  opportunities  which  are lies with which  lies with this particular  sector  and 
which  there  is a possible  especially  in terms  of Indian  scenario,  like the coastal  region  that we 
have  almost  7500  kilometer  of coastal  coastal  link that we have . And if I talk about  the area 
including  the exclusive  economic  zone , it is I think,  more  than 2 million  square  kilometer . So, 
which  is like huge  and there  are possibility  of exploring  a huge  amount  of entrepreneurship  as 
well as like you know  like the job and all, it is avail able in this particular  sector.  
So, Government  of India  is also putting  a lot of effort ; so maybe  it is better  to in next decade  or 
so; this sector  will bloom  like anything  and hold.  I really  request  all the the young generation  
people  right  now watching  this video  to look at look into this matter  and try to find out some  
opportunity.  Try to grab the opportunity  which  lies especially  in sub sub Indian  subcontinent  
continental  scenario  in this aquaculture  sector  specifically.  So, there  are 3 primary  production  
systems  with the highest  potential  for the financial  returns  and environmental  sustainability  in 
case of aquaculture  systems  are first the on-land finfish  recirculating  aquaculture  systems . 
Second  is offshore  finfish aquaculture  systems  and third  is bivalve  and the seaweed  aquaculture  
systems ; out of all the aquaculture  methods  aqua  aquaculture  methods  and they the the processes  
that is available , systems  that is available . According  to the FAO’s  recent  discussion  and all like 
and also based  on the based  on the very like, based  on the discussions  by the resource  person  all 
over the world.  It was found  out that these  three  particular  these  production  systems , this aquaculture  systems  has a very high potential  to become  a major  supplier  of the seafood , major  
supplier  of the protein  based  aquatic  species  in a very near in the near future.  
RAS  system  you already  know  already  know  what  is recirculating  recirculating  aquaculture  
systems  and how it works.  So, will know will be discussing  about  it in details  more  in later 
slides,  later slides  as well as in later lectures  in details  with the design  and all. The offshore  
finfish  aquaculture  systems  you know  the what  is offshore  is. In this offshore  regions  when  we 
go for cage on a cage cultur es and all. So, there  we call it offshore  finfish  culture  systems , 
bivalves , oysters and all like the seawee ds; the different  kinds  of seaweeds  we know  the brown,  
green,  red seaweeds  and all.  
So, this has a huge  potential ; I will discuss  in details  like what  is the what  are the potentials  that 
lies with this kind of production  systems.  So, if you see this particular  graph  in that is particular  
figure  that it shows  the abscissa  versus  coordinate , if you see the level  of risk versus  capital  
intensity.  The coastal  seaweed  has a very low capital  intensity  required  at the very beginning  
stage  of its production;  also the level  of risks  is also very less. Moreover,  it can also give us a 
huge  amount  of environmental  benefits  and all . Whereas , the coastal  ponds , the coastal  bivalves,  
coastal  finfish  has almost  moderate  level  of risk, and mode rate level  of capital  intensity.  
And this this circle  size actually  showing  us the current  scale  of production . You can see the 
coastal  seaweed  production  is very high all over the world.  But in Indian  scenario,  it is not yet 
properly  explored.  So, there  is a high chance  of going  to this particular  sector  for there  is a there  
will be a huge  bloom  in near future  in this particular  sector.  If you go for the offshore  finfish  and 
all, the capital  intensity  is very high and the level  of risk is very high.  However,  you will get a 
huge  amount  of benefits  economic  return  also, if you can do it proper  sustainable  way, proper  
scientific  way.  
So, this is also a very high economic  return  producti on systems,  but it comes  with the certain  
level  of risk; and also the capital  involvement  is also very high at the beginning.  So, the 
technological  improvement  in decrease  the relative  cost as I discussed . And also seafood,  the 
more  the seafood  demand  increase  the conversion  supply  will constrain t. So, this these  are the 
problems  that are associated  with this kind of sectors  as well.  The increase  in the traditional  
production  costs  due to the regulations  and all that also a major  issue  that we need  to address  based  on the. We have  to convince  the policymakers  and all to go ahead,  so providing  us with 
this kind of solutions.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  08:28)  
 
If you see, in general , what  is mariculture?  It is a branch  of aquaculture  which  involves  the 
cultivation  of marine  organisms  in seawater;  either  it is practiced  in offshore , inshore,  onshore  
based  system.  Offshore  mariculture  means  the enclosed  section  in the open  sea. The what  is the 
inshore ? The fish farms build  in the littoral  waters.  And the artificial  tanks,  ponds  and raceways  
are called  normally  that we culture  in the near to the shore ; it is onshore  mariculture.  If you see 
this particular  figure,  if you see this is the this is the this is the surfing  zone;  if you see the 
terrace, the burns  and the cliffs.  
So, this is the call the breakers  and after this littoral  zone  or the benthic  zone  if you see up to the 
almost  the moment , the depth  of seawater  becomes  more  than 60 meter  around  200 feet. So, up 
to that part is called  the littoral  zone.  So, there  is you will find a cliff,  this is the different  very 
standard  nomenclature  that you need  to remember . The coast  area the what  is the beach?  What is 
the call the beach ? What  is the coastal  area? What is offshore  area? What is near shore ? And this 
is the shoreline  you can see. 
This is the terrace , this is the surfing  zone;  this is the high tide and low tide area. That means  the 
in low tide tide low tide region , this is the low tide region  and this is the high tide regions ; it can 
go cover  the almost  the pool of the burns . So, this is this is how it looks  like and this is the standard  nomenclature  for these  kind of aquaculture  systems  and especially  in mariculture  
systems  that you need  to remember.  So, so other  than that the products  from  the mariculture  that 
have  a wide  variety  of uses like pharmaceuticals,  cosmetics,  nutraceuticals,  food additives,  
jewelry,  et-cetera  et-cetera . The major  and the minor  species  found  around  the worlds  coastline  is 
the seaweed,  mollusk , shrimp , marine  fishes ; and the minor  is like sea cucumber  and sea horses . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:36)  
 
So, what  are the types  of mariculture?  In general , we have  this mollusc  culture , crustaceans  and 
marine  plant,  finfish et-cetera.  So, will discuss  about  all these  four in details  a little bit details.  
So, in what  is mollusc  culture?  Actually , the if you know  the bivalves , especially  the bivalve  
mollusc;  so they are how in all the discussions  I have  covered  it in two different  by bifurcated  
into two different  subsections . First one is the brood  stock  or the seed supply  availability.  Second  
is the grow  out pond  or the grow  water  is necessaries  and necessities  and all . In the brood  stock  
and all the seed supply  if you consider  for the mollusc  culture,  the bivalve  mollusc  larva  are 
collected  from  the natural  rock in general,  using  the material  to which  is normally  adhere  to. 
Then, or either  it is produced  in the hatcheries  using  the artificial  propagation  methods  or 
artificial  populations  methods . So, these  are the two methods  by which  the seeds  are being  
collected  and seeds  are been  mollusc  larva  has been  collected,  larva  collected  or the seeds  are 
being  grown  there  or collected . And the grow  out in general  the larva  are grown  in the hanging  
cultures,  either  it is like a suspended  from  a floating  raft or the long lines . We call it is like long rope and where there  would  be strings  and trays  and stacks  or the mesh  bags will be hanged  with 
it. 
So, in general , these  mollusc  are normally  grown  in these  kind of structures,  vertical  or rack 
structure  or either  I mean  like it is a stick  like structure , if it will be called  vertical  if it is like a 
platform  like structure,  it is a wrap.  The bottom  culture  the shells,  stones,  rocks  or the cement  
slab added  to the ground , where  also they can grow or in the land based  systems.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:22)  
 
So, second  is the crustacean  culture,  mainly  the shrimps . So, mainly  the seed supply  for the 
streams  are actually  mainly.  Previously , it was majorly  we are actually  majorly  relied  on this 
wild caught  larva’s  and all. And but nowadays  this in case of hatcheries  we are where  we are 
mainly  that new trend  is like we go for this artificial  propagation  methods  by which  we use the 
varied  female s; or the egg carried  females  and then we do the proper  brood -stock  management  
and all, we get the larva  out of it. 
So, the grow -out points  where  grow -out ponds,  the grow -out takes  place . In general , the earthen  
ponds  or the concrete  raceways  or tanks  in case of crustacean  this kind of shrimps.  So, will more  
discuss  about  in details  and then later lecture  about  the culture  of shrimps  and about  the culture  
of this crustaceans , and how to the management  of hatcheries.  So, marine  plant  cultures , it also 
either  macro  or micro , micro algae  or macroalgae,  and also the sea grasses.  So, major  sources  of 
brood -stock  is the wild collection  definitely . But, most  culture  is now dependent  on the hatchery  collection  also, hatchery  production  in the 
early  life stages  also, in different  stages  of the world.  So, they are like people  are working  on it, 
scientists  are working  on it on this particular  broodstock  management  of marine  plant  cultures  
also. So, in case of grow out, the young  plants  are cultured  in three  different  method; either  in 
suspended , either  in long line or rafting  methods,  either  bottom  culture  in the sea and the benthic  
regions  where the large  rocks  or artificial  shapes  of concrete  on the seabed,  or the inland  tank 
culture . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:01)  
 
The third , another  thing  is the finfish culture  where  the broodstock  or the seed supply  is mainly  
from  the mix of domesticated  and the wild animals.  Most  of the species  are grown  from  larva  or 
fry produced  in the hatcheries  though  nowadays.  The growout , it can happen  in the cage culture , 
it can happen  in the pen culture ; because  mainly  we are talking  about  marine  eco mariculture . So, 
where  is the cage culture  which  is it can be inshore,  offshore  cages  fixed;  it can be fixed , it can 
be floating  or it can be submerged.  
So, inshore  cages  are located  in prote cted over shallow  areas  with the less water  circulation;  
whereas , the offshore  cages  where  they are located  in the more  than 30 meter  of at least the water  
depth ; and where  they will be having  at least this like deep  water  and the open  areas  which  less 
protection  from  storms  but with a better  water  exchange.  So, there  is a chance , it has a very high 
turbulence  area. There  is chance  that it can be in high turbulence  area, but we try to protect  it as much  as possible ; we try to put it in such a way, we try to find a way, find a place  in the offshore  
area where  there  is a less affected  by the sea storms  and this high turbulence  waves  and all. Next  
the pen culture , the nets or the fish pens are located  in the shallow  water  and their edges are 
anchored  to the bottom.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:24)  
 
In case of in this picture,  if you see this it it shows  exactly  how it looks  like the offshore  finfish  
production.  If you see this is the this is only the inshore  areas , where  this is the offshore  area, 
where  either  the submersible  cages  are installed  with the offshore . This is the offshore  finfish  
farm where  there  are different  kinds  of sensors ; nowadays  people  are putting  like the industries,  
the business  entrepreneurs  who are working  there.  So, they put the different  kinds  of sensors  to 
get a real time data about  the existing  structure , and about  how it can be that all the parameters  
can be well monitored  throughout  the throughout  the (lifestyle)  throughout  the harvesting  cycle.  
And this data is directly  connect  connected  through  the satellite  to the to the to the inland  offices  
and all; they collect  the data and they try to monitor  that whether  they meet  their needs.  They  
need  some  some  kind of human  super  intervention  is needed  or not. Or there  are some  
troubleshooting  measures  whic h are already  installed  there;  so, these  kind of troubleshooting  
measures  automatically  starts  acting  on it. Suppose  there  is a very lack of additional  foods  or 
additional  feed. And also there  are artificial  feeders  which  are installed  there  in case of feed 
deficiency  and all. So, they will they can easily  operate  from  the inland  office  offshore.  So, they can control  room , they can control  the system  and they this automatic  feeder  starts  
working ; and then they can feed it is like emergency  measure,  kind of emergency . This is just an 
example  of how the emergency  measure  look like in this kinds  of offshore  aquaculture  system,  
finfish  farms  and all. And after the see feed supply  feed supplies  and the juvenile  fishes  are being  
provided  from  the land; and they were  provided  there . And after a while,  after it comes  to the 
maturatio n stage,  it is harvested  and go to the processing  plant;  and from there  it goes to the 
market.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:25)  
 
And so this is the, if you see further  about  what  this mariculture  looks  like in general  in terms  of 
the siting  considerations.  So, if you see this green  thing  is, green  thing  is the place  where  actually  
we should  go ahead  and go for aquaculture  practices.  This this other  color  this this orange  colors  
are the one where  we should  not go. These  are the ones which  are which  should  be free from  any 
our anthropogenic  activities . Especially , anthropogenic  activities  they mean  like you should  not 
go for at least the major  aquaculture  practices.  So, if you see this first first green  region  is the 
aqua  recircula tory aquaculture  systems  which  you can do in the inland  areas  in near coastal  
areas,  even  in the coastal  areas  also with artificial  island  in island.  
So, that is a separate  thing.  RAS,  you can do mangrove  areas,  you should  not interfere  with the 
environment;  we should  not interfere  with the this especially  the mangrove  areas.  Mangrove  
areas  are a huge source  of carbon  sink for us; they consume  a huge  amount  of carbon  dioxide , they sequester ed that carbon . And not only that, they helps  us to get rid of the all the (unwan ted) 
like all the this in the high tidal situation ; or not only high tide, any storm  and all, they protect  the 
land from  this this storm  this is is sees from  activities  and all. 
So, these  mangrove  areas  are the one which  we should  not dislikes,  somehow  we should  not 
make  any changes  to the land,  land and all. Also  we should  not cut the mangrove  areas  for the 
sake of aquaculture.  That is the worst  possible  scenario  that we can do for the harm  that we can 
do to the environment.  Then , the coastal  pond s, coastal  ponds  are very high source  of these  
different  kind of mangrove  grasses,  the sea grasses  and all and which  are actually  very good.  
They  are also naturally  there  are different  kind of different  type of fishes,  different  kind of 
aquatic  species  can be made  available,  which  can fed the local  village rs and the local  
entrepreneurs.  
So, that is a complete  different  issues  that people  can work  on it. So, we should  not put that thing  
also in at risk. So, the aquaculture  practices  should  not be followed  in this coastal  ponds  on the 
village  areas  definitely.  Then , there  comes  the shallow  water  regions . In the shallow  water  
regions , where  the side of the coastal  area; there  you can easily  culture  the bivalves  and seaweed.  
It is a perfect corporate  dwelling  space  for the culturing  of the seaweeds  and the bivalves ; so, we 
should  go ahead  with this. It will not only help to give you economic  benefit , but also it will give 
you the environmental  benefit  as well because  these  seaweeds  and bivalves.  
Bivalves,  they are actually  call the these  filter  feeders;  they I think  they they can consume  a huge  
amount  of particulate  matter  from  the system . And they can utilize  it and they can reduce  the 
pollutant  load of the collected  that that wastewater  that water . And also not only that the 
seaweed,  it can consume  a huge  amount  of carbon  dioxide , and it can provide  the ample  amount  
of oxygen.  So, it somehow  it it helps , it is a huge  sector  now people  are working  on all over the 
world  in seaweed  and by seaweeds . 
So, to utilize  it as a source  of carbon  dioxide  storage  and utilization  process , carbon  dioxide  
sequestration  process.  And then there  come  the ports  and all where  major  economic  activities  are 
taking  place ; so you should  not disrupt  their that ecosystem , disrupt  their that that that particular  
systems  that. Then  the net pen forming  and all not deep  enough , so we should  not go for this pen 
farming,  it is. We we should  go for this pen farming  which  is not very deep  and all . We can have  an enclosed  space , we can have  this enclosed  space , we can supply  our seeds  or we can naturally  
collect  the wild seeds,  and we can supply  there ; and we can have  the have  our production  there.  
So, it is not good  enough  for offshore  farmings  and all, offshore  farming  or bivalve.  So, this is 
this is possible ; human  intervention  is it is it is it is done;  actually  they are in the in the pen net 
pen farming.  But, it is somehow  has a lot of environmental  how to say the disadvantageous;  it 
causes  it has a lot of disadvantages  including  the environmental  disruptions  and all. So, normally  
it is not kind of suggested  by the by different  by a lot of scientists  all over the world.  
So, then there  comes  a major  fishing  area where  actually  natural ; naturally  there  are a lot of 
fishes,  lot of aquatic  species  are available . So, you do not want  to disrupt  their;  you can go there  
and you can you can collect  the, you can just capture  the fishes  from  there.  Then , there  comes  the 
coral  reefs  and all; coral  reefs  definitely  it is a very major  eco ecosystem.  It normally  dwell  there , 
so we do not want  to disrupt  those kinds  of systems  as well;  it is a marine  ecosystem.  Then , this 
buffer  zone  where  you normally  do not find anything ; then there  comes  the offshore  offshore  
cage farming . 
You can go ahead  with this theory , you can put the put your cages  in multiple  cages , and go for a 
proper  farming  there.  It involves  with some  capital  investment,  but it gives  you a huge  return . 
And also you do not have  to worry  about  the any kind of. In most  of the inputs  are actually  being  
somehow  suppressed.  There  like you do not have  to supply  with the water,  you do not have  to go 
for fresh  water  exchange;  you do not have  to provide  it with the feed.  So, it is like you are you 
are culturing  your production , your farm , actuall y in a very natural  situations.  
So, you are actually  mimicking  the natural  situation ; not only mimicking,  actually  you are using  
your farming  in a natural  environment.  But, your production  can be very high based  on your, you 
are going  to want  to go for intensive  or semi -intensive  aquaculture . And after that, you do not 
want  to go for aquaculture  because  it is too far from  the port;  it is economically  not viable.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  23:29)  
 
So, what  are the environmental  risks  and impacts  that associated  with the mariculture?  The first 
of all, nutrient  pollution  and the eutrophication;  so, that is one of the major  reason . I remember , I 
told you in the last slide  that the pen culture  is sometimes  considered  as not a very good  idea to 
go for mariculture  process . This is not a good  practice  actual ly in general.  So, there  are people , 
there  are ways  of actually  recovering  those  cons by recovering  the disadvantages.  But, in 
general,  it causes  the eutrophication . What is the eutrophication?  It because  of the because  it is it 
is near to the coastal  pens,  near to the coastal  pens and coastal  the banks  and all. 
What happened ? There are like it and it normally  we go for the intensive  aquaculture.  In case of 
intensive  aquaculture,  intensive  pen culture , they produce  a huge  amount  of this fish faeces  and 
all; and all any aquatic  species  that were  culturing.  So because  of that, it causes  a huge  harm  to 
the surrounding  ecosystem.  Not only that, it is a major,  it is a huge  source  of nitrogen  species  are 
being  developed  here.  Because  of that, what  happened ? There are there  is a chances  of algal  
bloom . And if it started  algal  blooming  and it this far if they find it very suitable  environment  for 
them  to grow,  they will keep  on producing  very fast. 
At one point  of time,  they will just completely  cover  the surface  and it will cause  the 
eutrophic ation.  It will cause  the sunlight  to not to enter  to the system  to the that particular  water  
body ; and that is that is a major  that can cause  a major  harm . So, that is the eutrophication  of the 
nutrient  pollution.  Harmful  algal  blooms  as I already  discussed,  there  is a chance  like harmful  algal  blooms  can happen  and which  causes  this eutrophication . Spreading  of parasites  and 
diseases  is very there  is a chance  of because  it is in the wild situation.  You do not have  any 
control  with the environ ment  any control  with your catch;  with your I mean  with your farming  
products,  so that is a major  issue . 
The escapes , there  is a chance  they can they get escape  somehow  somehow  natural  because  of 
some  natur al calamity  or natural  erosion  process.  So, they may get this net can get eroded  like 
they can be some how there  is there  is a small  hole or something ; so all the fishes  all your 
farm ing products  will escape  that is a major  problem . Aliens  the same  way not only escapes,  but 
alien  species  alien  aquatic  specie s can come  in inside  the system;  and which  can also disrupt  the 
whole  ecosystem  like anything . 
Genetical  issues,  because  there  is a chance  of interbreeding  and all, because  there  is a chances  of. 
This is actually  I mean  there  are possibilities  of the mixed  culture ; this mix culture  and like. 
What do you mean  by mixed  culture?  Here like when  there  is any alien  species  are coming  inside  
your system  inside  your farm.  And it because  of their the the in the offspring , there  is a there  is 
chance s of having  very weak  offspring,  which actually  causes  a very different  kinds  of genetical  
problems  and all in this kind of. 
So, farming  up and in the fishing  down  the food chain,  what  does that mean?  Sometimes  there  is 
a chance  like we go for farming  outside  of the food chain  or maybe  we fishing  down  the food 
chain  or the food,  or the different  tropical  level . And because  of that, the whole  ecosystem,  this 
ecosystem  that we have  this in case of food chain,  that can disrupt.  Catching  the brood -stock  
from  the wild is actually  not a good  idea all the time.  Because  in the wild,  they may reduce  the, 
the actual  number  of; because  we are when  we are catching , we are not catching  in one or two; 
we are catching  numbers , so in huge  number.  
So because  of that, it can cause  serious  consequences  in the surrounding  ecosystem.  The habitat  
degradation  and the modification  we are actually  kind of playing  with the nature  here. And we 
because  of that, there  is a chances  of habitat  degradation  for the existing  dwelling  species  there.  
And the acoustic  disturbance  is definitely  there . Acoustic  disturbances  like nearby  places  if there  
is like in a port or something;  so they can also cause  the environmenta l disruption  to these  
systems  to this kind of our mariculture . Possibilities  for mitigation  obviously,  first is like IMTA proce ss as we have  already  discussed  
integrated  multi -trophic  aquaculture , that can minimize  this kind of problems . Use of the 
enclosed  recirculating  systems  for shrimp  and finfish ; definitely  you go for enclosed  in the 
inshore  this shrimp  and finfish culture.  Reduce  the disease  outbreak  and transmission  by use of 
medication  and different  hormonal  strategy  or the hormonal  injection . Feeding  management  to 
reduce  the waste  and to improve  the food security . Reduction  of the eutrophication  impacts  by 
properly  supplying  or by somehow  arranging  the system  pen in such a way in such a place , 
where  there  is a certain  amount  of water  flow. 
And because  of that it can get rid of the all the obnoxious  particles  or the pollutants  along  with it. 
So, somehow  we can have a reduced  in eutrophication  impact.  Proper  site selection  is very 
important  as I already  discussed ; the use of hydraulic  devices  to get rid of the water  in the gravity  
through  gravity , or the through  proper  way. So, through  conduit  systems  and all, removal  of the 
harmful  algae;  so we need  to think  about  it. We need  to really  worry  about  the harmful , so not to 
have  the harmful  algae  in our system.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  29:02)  
 
So, based  on all these  things,  why we should,  why still I prefer  to request  you to go for RAS  
systems  which  is much  better  than all the other  aqua  mariculture  systems.  Especially,  the in case 
of RAS  systems  is recirculating  aquaculture  systems , you can develop  the streams  and all; 
nowadays  it is possible.  It gives  you a better  environmental  performance  becaus e you are doing  the aquaculture  practice  in complete  environmental  security , in a complete  optimal  situation.  So, 
because  of that, you are actually  contr olling  the environmental  impact.  And it can also give you a 
huge  high production  capacities  per unit per unit area.  
Definitely,  because  of the control  situation , you can reduce  the mortality  rate. It will give you 
better  control  over the production  outcome.  The it can reduce  the impact  on the wild stocks  on 
the habitats  as it happens  in the mariculture  in general.  It reduce d the water  pollution  or the 
disease  transfer  or alien  like an alien species  intermissions.  So, best suited  for where  the local  
market  for seafood  is abundant;  so it is it has a lot of benefits  this RAS  recirculating  aquaculture  
systems . 
But, it comes  with the drawback  like it need,  it needs  actually  huge  amount  of energy ; and it 
needs  a huge  capital  investment  at the beginning . And however  if you can design  it properly,  it 
can give you other  benefits  as well.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  30:27)  
 
So, what  are the advantages  and drawbacks  of the offshore  finfish  production  in general?  It 
improves  the feed conversion  ratio. It improved  the disease  control  it has offshore . I mean  when  
we talk about  offshore  mariculture  that is the best that is one of the best aquaculture  practice  in a 
like among  the mariculture  or the other  mariculture  practices  and other . So, there  are these  three  
things  you have  to remember ; first is RAS , second  is offshore  finfish , and third  is bivalve  and 
seaweed,  these  three  are the future . In aquaculture  sector , these  three  are the future  where  we can get a maximum  benefit  out of it, 
without  disrupting  the environment  at all. So, it offshore  finfish has different  other  benefits  as 
well; it improves  the product  quality,  it improve  the water  quality  and site availability  as well as 
reduce  the user conflict , and use the unit cost. Because , of the vast place  already  available  in the 
sea high ocean . But, it comes  with the high risk and a high capital  investment.  So, which  we have  
to really  have  to worry  about;  and it needs  a very high scientific  scientist  intervention  or proper  
designing,  so that we to get the maximum  benefit  out of it. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  31:35) 
 
 So, in conclusion,  because  of the freshwater  scarcity  in many  areas  of the world,  it is expected  
that mariculture  eventually  will become  the dominant  form  of aquaculture.  And transforming  
how we produce  a seafood  through  strategic  investment  in innovative  more  sustainable  
production  methods,  which  will lead to a healthy,  abundant  and profitable  food systems.  These  
are the references  that I have  used in this particular  lecture  material.  Thank  you so much.  See 
you on the next lecture . 