Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
India n Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 19  
Introduction to Crab Culture  
Hello everyone , my name is P rofessor  Gourav Dhar Bhowmick from IIT Kharagpur . So, in 
today's lecture i n the module  we will be discussing about the technology of Crus tacea  
farming , so the lecture material for this today's class will be like on the on the basis of crab 
culture .  
(Refer Slide Time 00:48)  
 
So, this is an integrated part of this a dvanced aquaculture technology  course that we are 
learning through this NPTEL  curriculum . So, the concepts that I will be covering in this 
particular lecture material is the introduction to the crab farming , Scylla spp or the mud crab  
and the methods of culturing of mud crabs;  only the first two will be discussing right now in 
this particular lecture module , in the next lecture I will be discussing more other methods of 
culturing mud crabs as well . So, mostly I will be f ocusing on grow  out culture and the 
fattening  procedure in this lecture and we will be discussing about the other methods in the 
coming lecture .  (Refer Slide Time: 01:24)  
 
So, before starting about in details about the crab culture I think you already k now that 
among all the edible marine crustaceans this crabs is very famous , it is almost in the third 
position just after shrimps and lobsters because of its delicacy , because of its specific taste 
and not only in India  but also all over the world like esp ecially if you go to Europe and 
Southeastern Asian region it is very famous all over there and it is  a different species of crab  
actually . So, most of the commercially important crab species they belongs to the family 
Portunidae  and are recognized by the presence of flattened last pair of lake and which assists 
them to swim along in the columnar water like not in the bottom or not in the surface but in 
the column ar water .  
The most widely cultured spaces in the Southeastern Asia is like Scylla  species as I told and 
also there is E -sinensis  which is also called the river crab which is mainly cultured in China 
and Korea. So, the things that we will be discussing in my lecture series it will be mostly on 
the mud crab or the Scylla  species only . The Scylla  species especially the Scylla  serrata it is a 
commercially important crab species found in most of the estuaries and  the mangrove region 
in India.   (Refer Slide Time 02:43)  
 
 
In general , the crabs are produced they are normally sold either live or in the frozen condition 
to the market and it is transported by in viviers  or maintained in the same tank used for 
holding the other crustaceans like lobsters . The species that I will be mainly discussing on 
because of its importance , because of its availability and the market demand is the Scylla  
species as I already told it is also known as mangrove crab , green crab or the mud crab .  
It is mainly dwelling region is the South Eastern Asia, Mauritius, etc.  It normally requires the 
temperature range between 23 to 30 -degree celsius and the salinity range between 18 to 34 
ppt. If you see this life cycle of cra b this Scylla  species so mature  crab when they lay the egg , 
so after say like it reaches the  Zoea  stage so it goes for 4 to 7 instars  and which has a duration 
of total of 12 to 24 days and it metamorphes  to the megalopa stage.  In the megalopa stage it stays for like around 5 to 7  days from there it turns into the first crab stage . In the first crab 
stage it stays like that for like around 4 to 8 months and even sometimes more depending 
upon the specific environment and all on the food availability and all these things and then it 
grows to the mature crab stage,  so this is how their life cycle loo ks like .  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:21)  
 
So, in general the  mud crab, Scylla species  can be of two types like it can be of a different 
other types as well especially in India n brackish water region we find two types of mud crabs 
in general . One is Scylla  tranquebarica  which has a maximum size of up to 2.3 kg , so it is like 
really huge and it has a size of around 220 millimeter of nominal size and it can be 
characterized by the polygonal marking , different polygonal marking on your chelipads,  
walking and th e swimming legs .  
So the wrist of this chelip eds has two spines on its outer margin that is also a distinguishable 
feature for this kind of this Scylla  species , Scylla  tranquebarica, we normally find them like 
in the buried under the mud or the soil . You can abundantly find th em in the coastal lakes 
open in shore sea , backwaters , etc.  (Refer Slide Time 05:25)  
 
The other one is Scylla  serrata I will discuss about it in the next slide only , so here if you see 
this clearly distinguishable features between these two type of crabs, first one the A  is like 
top and bottom is like top view of the Scylla  tranquebarica  and the bottom one is the dorsal 
view of the bottom view of the Scylla  tranquebarica,  the same in the right side the it is a 
Scylla  serrata.  If you see the left side in the this scylla  tranquebarica  they have this specific 
polygonal structure in its swimming legs and also it is separate , where in case of skylla 
serrata  they do not have this kind of structure in their body .  
(Refer Slide Time: 06 :08) 
  
So, these polygonal markings are missing in this kind of structure and also what are the major 
distinguishable characters  is like maximum sizes can be only 0.7 kg it does not  go as high as 
the tranquebarica.  It has a nominal size of around 140 millimeter and the wrist of this 
chelipads  has one blunt spine on the outer margin .  
So, it can be found very deeply borrowed on the bottom of the estuaries or in earthen bunds  
of the ponds and canals.  It can be abundantl y found in the mangrove areas , so in general the 
mud crab farming it started in India  during the early eighties and it normally cultured in 
Andhra Pradesh , West Bengal , Kerala and Odisha,  only in the eastern belt the major portion 
of it is cultured in the eastern belt, eastern coastal area and even in Kerala as well .  
Generally , the color of their shell it varies from the deep molted green to the dark brown and 
even depending upon that also you can see how like delicious the spaces can be depending 
upon the  color of their shell and all these things . In general if you see the egg mass or we call 
it sponge how it looks like how they carry it with this and see the black color of this sponge 
or the egg mask what we call it is indicating that the hatching is immi nent that means it is 
going to hatch very soon and you see the crablets  how it looks like this Scylla  serrata crablets  
this is very small and they are just after the hatching is done .  (Refer Slide Time 07:49)  
 
So, mud crabs they are of huge interest due to its high demand and price and the rapid growth 
rate in captivity and high flesh content and also its particular taste and also because of this 
reason  this is a very prominent crab species that can be cultured in India n context and I would 
really prefer like you or whoever is watching this video right now go and find out more 
details about the mud crabs and all and also you can ask the experts and there are a lot of 
employability opportunity on this kind of mud crab culture in India n context especially if you 
are staying near to the coastal region say in this Sunderman belt or this Mohona and all these 
things .  
If you go to the Odisha  this or the major portion of the O disha is actually very much effective 
for culturi ng this kind of mud crabs and all it gives you a lot of export value to India  as well , 
but still it is not as utilized as it can be as the opportunity lies here but there are a lot of 
opportunity for this for the young entrepreneurs like you to go ahead  and go for this kind of 
mud crab farming .  
So, it can survive out of water for a week which is a good thing about it because if you just 
sprinkle with the water occasionally just to keep them cool and moist it can survive for up to 
a week so you do not  have to worry about the transportation , most of the cases the vegetables 
and the fish that we talk about it is very much perishable and what happened during the 
transportation only majority of the product is getting lost , we somehow lose s its actual taste  
actual order or like actual  shape .  
But in case of crab that i s the good thing because it can go for almost one week without water 
and all it can go and it can survive it , so you can simply transport it from one place to another even in India , even outsi de India  as well if you have a proper transportation system ready , 
supply chain system ready for you . In general,  there are some vernacular  names for the smart 
graphs in B engali we call it Nona Kankara  or Samudra  kakra, in Marathi  it has different 
name , so these are the name in Telugu  it is called Manda Peeta  and all these things . So, there 
are in different places the same crab has different vernacular names .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:16)  
 
 
A total of 3 ,500 tons of mud crabs are caught annually in India  according to the recent study 
and in brackish water more than 80 or 75 percent of it is done in the brackish water , whereas 
in marine region it is done like around proper marine regions around a thousand tones.  In 
1987 around 1 500 tons of life mud crabs  are exported annually and its valuation stands 
around 30 crores in 1987,  very recent data is missing right now .  So, we are like working on it recently like maybe by the end of this year you will be able to 
get the information about the exact valuation ri ght now what is standing about the mud crab 
cultivation and its valuation . They are in general omnivorous in nature , what is omnivorous , 
like they can have the vegetation , they can have the animals like they are not exactly 
herbivores  or not carnivores the y are both , they are with both but they normally try to have 
the feed they try to have as a food the remnant s of fish , crustaceans , mollusks,  plants or the 
detritus  found in the natural environment.   
So, if you supply it with the more amount of animal protein and all so they grow very fast in 
general we saw it in the research lab , they often get infested by but there is some problems 
associated with this kind of farming as well because they can be easily infested by the 
parasites like acorn  barnacles and the goose bondicles but there are procedures to get rid of it 
as well to do the troubleshooting for this kind of or I would say like the disease controlling 
systems as well that is available .  
So if you se e the breeding of mud crab in India  if you see the locality wise the period and the 
peak season the southern coast of India  mainly the Kerala region , so there the peak  season is 
September to February and you can grow it like for the year all over India  it is possible to 
grow them throughout the year but the peak season is like some particular time when the 
number of production goes very high and which can be utilized for export purpose as well 
because it can definitely fulfill the internal demand and then i t can go for the external market . 
The Karwa r regions , in the Tuticorin  region , Lake Pullicat,  Kakinada  region , so all these 
regions are there where normally we have this breeding of mud crab  and the peak season 
varies place to place .  (Refer Slide Time 12:53)  
 
So, in general there are different methods for mud crab farming , so this lecture in today's 
lecture will only in this particular lecture material will only discussed about the two of them . 
Let u s start with the grow out culture , in case of grow out culture the young crabs are grown 
in a period for like say 5 to 6 months in this method till are desirable sizes at it and the grow 
out systems the mud crab  they are usually , culture is done in the pond normally with or 
without the man grove with the size of around 0.2 to 5 hectares , you know what is hector right 
one hectare is 10 to the power 4 or like 10 000 square meters .  
So, it is like around two and a half acre , so the ponds are fitted with the proper bounds and 
the tidal water exch ange , so then when the tidal level will high like when it will reach the 
high tide the sea water will come into your pond and it will provide you with the fresh sea 
water .  
Then you have to have a discharge canal so when the low tide situation will happen so you 
can open the drainage canal and you can open this loose gate for the drainage canal so water 
will go back to the sea again . So, you have to design your titrate from accordingly based on 
the highest high tide level and the lowest low tide level , you can have the seawater exchange 
in your pond . Fencing is obviously advisable because they can they can crawl around so you 
can definitely lose them so better to have a proper fencing around in this growout culture 
systems .  
Larger pond strengthening is  very crucial along with the outlet area and for stocking wild 
juvenile crabs are actually used which is not good which is not actually detrimental one  of the 
major reason because we a re actually catching like somehow we are reducing the population in the wild, I mean like wild population in the natural environment because there is  a problem 
for the propagation method we have to collect the wild juvenile crabs  of around like 10 to 
100 gram  size in general . Culture duration 3 to 6 months and in general they took around 3 to 
6 months .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:13)  
 
  
This is the  mud crab  grow out pond how it looks like and this is see the earthen mud crab  
pond culture with the netting , you can see the nets the simple net structure . It prevents the 
mud crab to crawl around and go out of the pond area , so in general the stocking density are 
one to three crabs per square meter we provide , supplementary feeding is required which 
comprises of mainly the trash fish,  always remember you have to provide at least 5 to 10 
percent of the biomass as a feed per day , what does that mean actually suppose you have a 
crab of around like say 100 kg in your pond so every day you have to provide at least 5 kg of 
feed to your biomass I mean like to your culture species that is k ind of mandatory .  
So, at least 5 to 10 percent of its biomass of the culture species has to be provided as a feed 
every day , the feed can differ it can be anything like right from the roti fire when it is very 
small , can be artemia a new place when it is like reaches a certain stage and then you can 
provide them with the trash fish , you can provide them with the like , there are a lot of 
opportunities , there are a lot of animal based proteins that you can supply it wit h depending 
upon the availability or not .  
In general the the partial harvesting can be done when market size crab they reached around 
at the end of third month and you have to properly monitor for their general health growth 
rate and the adjustment of the  feeding rate , regular sampling is very necessary because you 
will not  be able to understand like what is its feed demand because after every 7 to 10 days 
you put them out randomly collect say like 10 or 20 pieces of them and weigh it  and because 
as per th e calculation you can find out the total average , you can easily get the average 
biomass and you multiplied with the total number of crabs that you are  culturing there and 
just supply it and 5 percent of it is will be the feed .  So, based on that you wi ll supply them with the feed . Partial harvesting or the stock thinning 
ensures that the better chances of survival by reducing the cannibalism and the mutual attack , 
so what does it mean what is cannibalism and the mutual attack ? Sometimes what happens , 
when sometimes they reach a higher stage of their growth system , if by somehow you you 
provide them with the minimum amount of food and because of their natural habituation what 
they do they will go and attack the other crabs,  so this is how it works .  
This is called the cannibalism or the mutual attacks , so in order to reduce that we need to go 
for partial harvesting sometimes in this kind of culture systems . So, what is the second 
method that we can discuss today it is like the fattening . After moulting  is done the crab 
musculature  needs some time to grow its filled to its new shell , so the crab at this stage is 
called the thin empty or the water crab. What does that mean ? It means like when it reaches 
around we need 5 months for particular crab species to  grow , so at the end of 4 months it 
almost reaches its harvesting market size , however still their meat concentration is not at its 
optimum level .  
So, though their shell is formed it is thin and however the meat portion is not actually 
sufficient enough or not actually fully grown enough , by looking by even by your naked eye 
we can think that it is grow it is done so it is already in the market size let us just harvest 
them and we use them no , do not  do this .  
(Refer Slide Time 19:25)  
  
In this fattening method what we do so we like try go for this we call this process as an empty 
or the thin crabs. In general,  we identify them and then we harvest them after a few weeks 
until they are full of meat and ready to be actually marketed . It involves with rearing  of the 
soft-shell  crab for a few weeks till the hardening of the exoskeleton and the produced hard 
crabs ar e commonly known as the actual mud .  
So, it usually usually it pays around three to four times more price than the soft crabs just 
because their amount of meat that is available there . So, in case of a mud or like the final 
stage when it reaches its hard crab stage now it is become more costlier and just you need to 
wait for a couple of weeks and to keep it in that stage .  
So, in general,  how this fattening is done or fattening from the word itself you can understand 
like why it is called fattening . Fattening is normally done in a small tidal point of size of 
around point 0.025 to 0.2  hectare and a water depth of around 1 to 1.5  meter . The bottom of 
the pond is prepared before stocking of the soft crab by draining the water followed by sun 
drying and t he addition of lime to get rid of all the unwanted micro organisms or say like 
predators or there is  a less chance of a predator but still the unwanted , unhygienic 
microorganisms  and all .  
So, in order to do that we first get rid of all the water after we get rid of the water we sun dry 
the bottom of the pond and then we put the lime layer in it . Then we strengthen all the pond 
bunds  to remove all the holes and the crevices so that it will cann ot pass through it . The 
sluice area is properly taken care of to prevent the escape of these crabs  through the sluice 
gate and the inlet area are reinforced using the bamboo matting inside the b und so in order to 
go for further enhanced structural stabilit y and all .  Proper fencing is done to prevent the escape of crabs we can use the bamboo poles and net 
incline towards the pond over the sides of the bun d so what will happen it will be like this 
suppose this is the pond so the fencing will be like this tow ards the bond side so and it will 
incline towards the pond  side.  
The soft crabs  are stocked in the pond usually in the morning hours say like 0.5 to 2 crabs per 
square meter that will be the stocking density depending upon the size of the crab. Stocking 
density  for producing crabs like say 500 gram is around one crab per square meter . As I 
mentioned like depending upon the size it can vary from 0.5 to 2  crabs per square meter , so in 
general 6 to 8 cycles of fattening can be carried out in a pond based on the location and 
availability of the water crabs  and by repetitive stocking and harvesting .  
(Refer Slide Time 22:28)  
 
  
This is the individual container for mud crab  fattening , so in general in  case of big culture 
pond , the pond is split into different partitions of suitable size for stocking uniformly sized 
crabs within the same compartment . Then the stocking on the basis of sex within the 
compartments is better and reduces the attack of the ag gressive male crab,  so you you put a 
proper compartment for the male crabs , proper compartments for the female crabs , because 
because of that there will be no competition for a female crab  between two male crabs and it 
will cause the cannibalism as I mentioned or the mutual attacks . We could provide the shelter 
using the old tires,  tiles, bamboo baskets,  etc to minimize the cannibalism or the mutual 
attacks .  
In general the pen or in a cage s also we can do this kind of flat fattening process , so  if we 
talk about the marine culture because earlier we were discussing about the fattening in the 
pond that means which is in the coastal region you are kind of depending upon the tidal 
movement of the sea .  
So, based on that your seawater exchange can be happen , but in case of pen and cage you do 
not have to worry about the freshwater sorry seawater exchange because it involves the 
fattening of the crabs in pens and bamboo cages or the floating net cages or shallow assuring 
waterways which we can call it as a pen or within the large stream ponds having the good 
tidal watering influx. Bamboo splits , high density polyethylene or nylon can be used as a 
netting material .  
In this kind of cases preferable  size of the cage if it is a cage culture should be around three 
by two by one meter of size , so around six cubic meter volume with a row size arrangement 
of the cage for easy feeding and the monitoring you have to provide and then stocking density can be as high as 10 crabs per square meter and five crabs  per square meter form even for the 
pen culture which definitely increases your productivity .  
(Refer Slide Time 24:44)  
 
So from all these from these two culture methods that we discussed , what are the co nclusions 
that we can come up with so we discuss about the culture of crustaceans like crab and the 
brief introduction of their life cycle , we discuss about the commercially important crab 
species that is mud crab,  we discuss about the fattening and actually fattening is more 
advantageous method among the two that we have discussed because it is a shorter and more 
profitable culture period . In India  the growout  culture is not popular much mainly due to the 
non-avail ability of the crab seats and the commercial feed .  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:20)  
 So, what are the takeaway messages that you can have from this from this lecture among all 
the edible marine crustaceans , crabs occupy the third position because of its delicac y, demand 
and price just after the shrimps  and lobsters . Though sometimes it depends upon the people 
sometimes people like me I do like crabs more than the lobsters and also , so has a very huge 
demand .  
The Scylla  serata  is mainly very famous crab species that is found in the India n estuary and 
the coastal region mostly and it is highly found in the states of A ndhra Pradesh , West Bengal, 
Kerala  and Odisha. H owever there is a huge opportunity for it to grow further , so thi s kind of 
culture species there are cultural methods are already available , there are scientific 
discussions are going on like how to increase the production of this kind of crab species and I 
already discussed about you get a point like if you go for pen culture , if you go for cage 
culture you can increase the production very much and which will give you much higher 
economic revenue , because it will give you a less design constraint , less land acquisition.   
Other than that, first of all India  is having alm ost 7500 kilometer of long coastal region which 
is like around 2 million square kilometer of exclusive economic zone where any India n 
citizen with a proper permission you can go and do the business in this region . So there is 
ample opportunity that i s what  I always talk about like this things are very basic stuff that we 
are discussing but there is a lot of opportunities lies in the market in the outside if you go 
outside and you just start doing business , start doing working on it think about it how to 
increase the profitability further and there are a lot of scientific research available , there are 
experts available in India  itself . So, you just talk to them decide like how to grow your own 
business ideas , how to grow your own entrepreneurship mindset on this kind of activities , on 
this kind of culture things.   
In general mud crabs are using we discuss about the methods like grow out  culture and 
fattening in this lecture , however in the next lecture materia l I will be discussing more about 
what are the other methods that are available for culturing of crab species  in India , but not 
only in India  but outside in India  as well specifically for this kind of mud crabs.  (Refer Slide Time: 28:09)  
 
So, these are the references that you can take a picture or you can just go and google it and it 
will give you some additional information about all the stuff that I have discussed and it will 
give you a lot of knowledge about what exactly is happening in the  mud crab  forming in 
India n context as well as an international context . So, that i s it so thank you so much maybe 
you get to know some very valuable information regarding the mud crab,  so we will discuss 
more details in the next lecture , thank you .  