Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture - 11 
Polyculture, IMTA  
Welcome everyone, my name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick; I am from the agricultural 
food engineering department of IIT Kharagpur. So, in this particular lecture series in advanced 
aquaculture technology today, I will be discussing about the polyculture and IMTA in details.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:43)  
v 
So, the concepts tha t I will be covering in this particular lecture will be on the farming systems 
and their classifications. What is polyculture? What is the, what are the pros and cons of having 
polyculture integrated multi -trophic aquaculture systems; or in short, we call it IMTA. And what 
are the subsystems of IMTA; and what are the benefits of this particular IMTA systems. And what 
are the advantage advancement that is happening in this particular field of research?  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:13)  
 
In general, the aquaculture s farming systems are can be classified in the based on different criteria. 
First of all, based on intensity it can be extensive, semi -intensive and intensive; we have already 
covered this properly. We know what is this, what are these different kind of aq uaculture systems. 
Based on the number of species cultured, it can be monoculture, it can be polyculture. I think from 
the name itself we can understand in what is monoculture and polyculture. Based on in based on 
integration, we have agriculture cum aquac ulture, we have livestock cum aquaculture.  
Based on this integration, this agriculture cum aquaculture, we I think you have heard of rice cum 
the fish field or fish farming systems. So, where we simultaneously we you, we go grow the rice 
as well as the fis h in a same field; because, the rice or the paddy field, it needs the standing water 
all the time with it. So based on that funda, we use this agricultural cum aquaculture systems 
farming systems. So, another is the livestock cum aquaculture; I will discus s about all these things 
in details in later slides. So let me give you a brief before that.  
Livestock cum aquaculture where I will be, where we will be doing the aquaculture, along with a 
say like poultry farming, see like pig farm et -cetera et -cetera. So , what is happening? So, all these 
poultries and all their droppings, like there is excreta are actually directly fed to the aquaculture 
species; so that the feed requirement can be minimized or completely nullified. And parallely we 
can grow livestock as well as aquaculture species together in our farm to increase the productivity 
and the economic return.  
Based on the salinity we have freshwater, we have brackish water, we have marine water. I think 
you know it better what is brackish water, what is marine  water, though I will be discussing in 
details. In general, the freshwater is the one mainly measure of the surface water which is available 
on the land, landlocked base, like on the on the side of the land. Or, I mean like specifically when 
the river star ts from the mountain until the moment it reaches the mouth of the river or we call this 
it reaches the sea; this duration this part we have we call it normally freshwater. So, so then which 
has a very low salinity level.  
There are a brackish water. Brackis h water in general, brackish water means the water that is 
available in the estuary region or the river mouth region, where the river actually drops in, and 
connects with the sea. So what happened in that region? The, it has a mixture of freshwater which 
is having very low salinity almost zero; and in the marine marine water which has which has a 
very high salinity of 30 to 35 even up to 40 PPT. So, brackish water has the salinity level in between 
that. 
Then, comes the marine water or sea water which is bas ed on the we know the mariculture; 
mariculture is coming from this marine water culture only. So, based on the salinity, we divide the 
farming systems into these three different subcategories. Based on the enclosure systems, we have 
pond culture, you know what is pond? Cage culture, we put the cage inside either in a stagnant 
body in the freshwater resources, freshwater reservoir or any stagnant lake and, lake or river, or 
stagnant lake or even moving river, or we can put it in the sea as well, the ocean su rface in the 
offshore area as well.  
So, there that is called cage culture when we put the cage, and we use the water which is inherently 
present there itself. Then, there comes pen culture. Pen culture is nothing but we just kind of 
enclosed one part of th e oceanic body or one point of the lake body; and we enclosed it with the 
kind of make it landlocked with one portion open; so it is called the kind of pen. So, this is one 
example of pen culture where we do the all the do we culture the species that we ta rget. And for 
that the water exchange is not a big issue because that is inherently present in the system itself, 
because of the its connection with the actual water bodies.  
Raceway culture, we have already discussed what what is raceway culture, how the r aceways are 
designed and all we have already discussed in last lecture series. The tank culture: tank Culture 
also you know how it is designed, what are the suitable designs and all, we have already discussed in our last lecture series. So, these are the t ypes of aquaculture farming systems that that involves 
based on the encloser type encloser.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:35)  
 
So, polyculture we if you remember, we discussed very brief about it in very first lecture, I think. 
So where, we have discussed about the practicing of culturing more than one species of aquatic 
organism in the same point. How to target them? Because, see  if you are targeting more than one 
organism, aquatic organisms, but more than one species of aquatic organisms, but everyone likes 
to have zooplankton. So, there will be what will happen? There will be a high demand of 
zooplankton and there is a high risk  of they they will not be fed enough.  
They we cannot feed them enough because of the limited resource of zooplankton in a specific 
water body, or suppose you are in your farm itself in your pond. So, what will happen? What you 
need to search search for? Yo u need to search for the species which have a different habit like 
different food habits. Suppose you can culture like if you say people who are vegetarian, non -
vegetarian, or who are like only vegan, so it is like that. So, you have to have find out this three, 
four different kind of people; you have to like just the same way you have to find three, four 
different kind of aquatic organisms.  
And you can just easily farm them together, because you do not have to worry about the specific 
demand of any specifi c food habit of any specific species. Because, they all are being fed by 
different other other different food different foods present in a natural or artificial whatever it is; 
but it is available in the water body. Suppose some some fish they like to have  the phytoplankton, 
some fish they like to have zooplankton; some of them like to have the aquatic insects on the larva. 
Some of them like to have the aquatic organisms which is present in the benthic region.  
Some of them are happy with the aquatic vegetat ions and weeds et -cetera. So, best see in this 
picture itself you can see five different cultures pieces are there which you can culture it together 
in a same pond. So, what will happen? They do not have any competition for the food; second 
thing, it will increase the economic return from your system. Third thing, it will completely 
interdependent, you will get a completely interdependent artificial ecosystem you can generate 
literally form formulate in your farm, or in your whatever the target land it targ et pond it is.  
So, this concept of fish production maybe maximized by combining these different food species 
with these different food habits. And also we can utilize the different different  trophic and spatial 
niches of a of a pond; and we can maximize the production per unit area.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:14)  
 
In general, CARP polyculture it involves catla, rohu, mrigal. Another another very important thing 
that I want to discuss with you, yo u can choose the polyculture, you can choose the type of culture 
type of species that you want to have in your farm based on their area of dwelling. See in this 
picture, catla is in the surface water body; almost on the surface of the water. Rohu is in the  in the 
bottom dweller, there in, sorry rohu is in the column dweller there in the middle portion of the 
river; so we have this different name. If you remember limneti c, littoral, sublittoral zones.  
So, I am not going into more details. So in general, just  remember as a lemurs, it is like surface 
column and bottom. So, the bottom dwellers or the main thing dwellers are like mrigal. So, if you 
cultivate catla, rohu, mrigal at the same go, they will not be competing for each others food. So, at 
the same pond,  you can increase the production and that is why it is called the Indian major CARPs. 
Indian major CARPs it consists of catla, rohu and mrigal; but, they dwell in the different regions. 
So, because of that you can increase the production by introducing thr ee different species in 
combination with each other.  
Same way, if you go for silver carp. If you go for grass carp and if you go for go for common carp, 
see they are also zoo; their dwelling nature is also different. Silver carp they like to have the 
zoopl ankton; and the grass carp, they grass carp and rohu they like to have the phytoplankton. And 
mrigal common carp they like to have the detritus present in the bottom of the pond. So, based on 
that you can have silver carp, grass carp and common carp also; you can cultivate together, you 
can cultivate it together in a in a same go.  
Same way, why not to go for si x species combination? So, there are recent studies which are like 
people are working on it. So, people what they are doing? They are combining all t hese six species 
together who does not have much of a competition in between each other. And they will happily 
be happily dwell in your pond, happily dwell in your farm; and they can increase the production 
in in multiple. This in when you go for six speci es combination, catla 15 percent, rohu, silver carp 
silver carp 15 percent, rohu 20 percent, grass carp 15 percent, mrigal 15 percent, and common carp 
20 percent.  
That is a specific combination that is fine to be scientifically optimum for go for this comb ination 
of this this Chinese carps and common carps together in a polyculture pond or polyculture systems 
that you may design, or you may have  in your farm. So, that is how the polyculture thing is work.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:58)   
So, different kinds of p olyculture examples are already given by very earlier studies in almost 30 
40 years back. Tilapia and snakehead are the channa species. The snakehead preys on unwanted 
tilapia fingerlings; so they can easily they they can easily form together. The referenc es also given 
if you want to know more in details, you can search for the details by Brick and Stickney 
newspaper in 1979. The details are given at the end of the lecture. Atlantic Salmon and Wrasse 
can be grown together which is one type of Labridae famil y species; and this Wrasse control the 
sea lice in Atlantics salmon cages.  
So, because of that, they can help each; they are complementary to each other. So, in Sayer and 
Costello paper 1996, you will find this they have done this kind of study; and they h ave found out 
it is a very very promising and very standard way. You should go ahead with this kind of species 
culture polyculture in your farm to get the maximum benefit out of it. Salmon and Sea cucumbers 
sea cucumbers, they feed on fish faeces, fouling organisms and unconsumed unconsumed feed.  
So, what will happen? Whatever the unconsumed feed the uneaten feed that is actually getting 
wasted from your farm. You can utilize it when you (cul) culture the sea cucumber and the salmon 
in the same pond, normal ly in the temperate region. Or, you have to have it artificially you have 
to in control the environment. In control environment, you can go salmon and sea cucumber 
together in this polyculture forms.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:31)  
 
The factors which affect th e species selection and the stocking rates in case of polyculture, 
definitely the water temperature. So, you do not, you are not going to go for the salmon and sea 
cucumber in in a climate, where they are not adapted to adapted to or they are not getting 
accustomed with with those kinds of temperatures. So, you have to know at which temperature 
your target species can safely dwell in your nature; so that you have to target first. Second thing is 
the market value of the fish. Suppose you already have like th ree four big tilapia farm in your 
vicinity and you have your neighbor neighboring ponds or in neighboring farms and all.  
And suppose then again you come and you know that the market is already fulfilling. The market 
demand is already being fulfilled by tho se tilapia that is being produced in those farms. Still, if 
you want to go ahead with the production of the tilapia that does not make sense. Because you are 
marking, you are actually what you are doing? You are reducing the market value of that price 
because of the demand available availability, huge availability of the fish. So, what you can do? 
You can simply search for some alternate fish species that you can culture and that you can that 
you can culture in your pond so to increase the production rate o f your.  
So, to increase the production and so to increase the get the maximum value from the market, Pond 
fertilization practice what type of fertilization is actually being practiced in your pond that is also 
very important thing. So based on that, you ha ve the zooplankton availability; based on that you 
have the phytoplankton availability. I mean like all I am just giving you an example like what kind 
of species can be available there; and which can be used as a feeding habit, which is actually a 
normal f eeding habit for the target species. And based on that you have to arrange the system, 
arrange your farm, design your farm accordingly.  
The potential and the uncontrolled spawning in grow out pond that is also very important, when 
you when you they when yo u go for this grow -out ponds and all; they are they are sometimes. 
What happens sometimes? You do not you cannot control the spawning and you may have 
additional amount of fishes or additional amount of unwanted species available in your pond, 
which is not  acceptable.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:43)  
 
So, what are the pros and cons of polyculture? First of all, it reduces the environmental impact of 
aquaculture systems; I think you already know the reason behind it. As I give you as I already gave 
you one specific example which is very important, which you can (rem), you can memorize like 
the sea cucumber and the Salmon case. Whatever the uneaten fish uneaten feed and also the excreta 
from that fish is being consumed by the sea cucumber. So, what it happens? It reduces the 
environmental impact. So, it in creases the profitability because you are having higher amount of 
species that your high number of species that you are culturing in your pond.  
And you have more amount of output that you are getting from your farm; so definitely you will 
get a more econom ic return. Optimal utilization of the sources resources, you are utilizing each 
sector, each part of the pond, each part of the of your farm precisely with providing the all the 
optimum species that is available, that they are  dwelling natural dwelling pos itions and all. Based 
on that you are categorizing, you are culturing the species the target species and all. So, which will 
definitely utilize them optimally, whatever are the resources that is available in your pond.  
So, what are the cons part of it? It  is sometimes the pond management becomes difficult definitely. 
When you have more than one cultural species that is available and you have to think about; you 
have to have a proper expertise on each and every culture species that is available in the in yo ur 
pond.  
And you have to know more precisely about how they can be treated properly. And if they there 
is some disease outbreak, how they can be properly maintained in a quarantine pond and all. 
Inadequate supply of the fingerlings limits the choice of spe cies available. Sometimes suppose you 
want to go ahead with this six species culture, six species polyculture with all the Chinese carps, 
all the major carps. But what happened? Sometimes you may not find proper ample amount of 
green carp, the fingerlings for the green carp. So, what you have to do? You have to limit your 
resources; we have to go ahead with without having the green carp.  
Because it is not actually always possible to have all the species at the same go and all the 
fingerlings in the same go.  Either you have to go for some specific this banks nowadays in 
according to the Government of India is supporting these kind of activities, you will find in 
different states. They started having their own kind of seed bank. So, they call it a seed bank wh ere 
they will be having all the all type of crop, all type of fish species and all these fingerlings available.  
So, available of these fingerlings is very important. So, to or maybe the proper  broodstock  
management area is there, where the they are actually culturing the. They are always available 
with the fingerlings for different species; so that you can just borrow from there, you can get it 
from there, and you can go ahead with your farm.  (Refer Slid e Time: 17:43)  
 
So, what is integrated multi -trophic aquaculture or IMTA? IMTA it is a system which is a highly 
effective modern approach of polyculture that is being increasingly adopted nowadays. In case of 
IMTA, unlike unless like unlike polyculture, w hich is which is actually a type of polyculture as 
well. But in this particular case, we target all the trophic level. All the trophic level means? First 
of all, the feed aquaculture species like fin fishes or shrimp are the carnivores. Who like the specie s 
who fed by only aquaculture species; they fed only other aquaculture species or like say 
zooplankton or say small fishes et -cetera.  
Organic extractive aquaculture species like shellfish, shellfish and herbivorous fish; they normally 
are the filter feeder . They are organ, they they extract the organics, organic whichever the very 
small zooplankton and phytoplanktons available in the water; they kind of filter feed, they have 
this mechanism in inbuilt their body in their body. They another one is inorganic extractive 
aquaculture species like the seaweed and they are the primary producer. So, if you see there is like 
if you go ahead with the culturing of seaweed, any kind of shellfish and the shrimp , or any kind of 
finfish together. What will happen?  
First of  all, the seaweed will act as a primary producer. Second thing, the herbivorous fish or the 
shellfish, they will consume this, this this primary producers; they will they will be called for a 
Filter feeder and all. Or they are then they are can be fed by, they can be fed to the carnivorous 
animals, carnivorous aquatic species that is available. So, in the same go, you can have this culture 
of culture of finfish, shellfish and the seaweed in the same go. So, this is called the IMTA 
integrated multi -trophic a quaculture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:36)  
 
If you see in this particular picture the fed aquaculture with the finfish, you see the the extra. Here 
the fed aquaculture plus the extractive aquaculture is done in the same go; where the organic and 
the organic ma tter is consumed by the shellfish; and inorganic matter is consumed by the seaweed. 
So, the same go you have this organic and inorganic consumers; you have this finfish we are 
consuming; the all your this all the available the other fishes, other aquatic s pecies that is available.  
So, by this way you can have a cumulative production, you have a; it can grow multiple, multi it 
can grow very high; it can it can multiply your economic return from your farm as well. So, in 
general, IMTA it creates a balanced sy stem for environmental sustainability or the bio mitigation. 
It improves the economic stability product diversification and the risk reduction definitely. It also 
have the very high social acceptability; because better management practices are being perfor med 
in case of IMTA.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:40)  
 
What are the criteria for selection of species? Definitely species with the complementary roles. 
You have to target the complementary roles like one species has should not have any direct 
competition with o ther species. So, you have three different species which are complementary to 
each other, plus they can fed by fed to trophic level, so that is also good. So, in that case, you are 
actually artificially building an ecosystem; they are building a food chain  there. That food chain if 
you successfully optimally cultured them, it can grow very high; or it can give you a very high 
economic return from each trophic of from each trophic level.  
The adaptability of the species to the habitat, it is very important; y ou need to know that it is not 
only that the trophic level does matter. You have to know that if this species is actually be 
culturable in that particular habitat or not that you have to understand. The culture technology and 
the site environmental conditi on, you have to be precise about it; like what are the technologies 
that you will be using and how you can optimally enhance the production performance of the of 
your system by choosing proper selection proper species as for your cultures, for your culture  tank 
or culture form.  
Ability to provide both efficient and continuous bio mitigation definitely; so as you have to have 
this bio mitigation techniques. You see the carbons or the organic fed is the feeder is there; 
inorganic feeder is there. What is happ ening for because of the presence of them, like giving you 
one example. Because of the presence of seaweed, carbon dioxide reduction is happening. It can 
consume huge amount of carbon dioxide; it can act as kind of oxygens supply, dissolved oxygen 
supply t he oxygen to the aquatic species is present there. So, it can enrich the ecosystem of the 
nearby vicinity.  
Other than that, though the shellfish they are consuming all the organic; that means they are filter 
feeders; so they consume the zooplankton, phytop lankton like this, which can and which are 
having very high carbonaceous body in self. So, they will consume it and they will use it in their 
body. In the same go, finfish they will consume this shellfish and the and the shellfish; and they 
can consume the y they if the other fishes and all. And they will they are in the highest chain of the 
higher side of the trophic level.  
Market demand for the species, definitely it is very important in the commercialization potential. 
How how much it is like what is the possibility of commercialization of the species that you are 
targeting in your system is also another important thing to worry about.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:08)  
 
What are the subsystems of IMTA inorganic extractive subsystems, where aquatic plants have a 
high assimilative capacity we know? So, the more inorganic extractive subsystems as I example, 
as I gave the already already I gave the example of seaweed. So, seaweed has a very high 
assimilative capacity; so, it will consume huge amount of nutrients prese nt in the in that aquatic 
body, not only that it consumed the carbon dioxide. So, it assimilates a lot of obnoxious and 
nuisance creating products elements from the environment.  
The plant bio -filters can thus thus  greatly reduce the overall environmental impact of fish culture; 
and it can stabilize the culture environment. Farming of the species that are low in the food chain 
and that extract their nourishment from the water involves relatively low input. So, why b ecause 
of they can extract the nourishment from the water itself; so you have do not have to worry about 
the feed or the their the feed requirement or the nourishment requirements and all. Because they 
are they grew by them, they grow by themselves.  
So, th ey do not need any additional monitoring or additional involvement, human involvement for 
their for them to grow. So, most suitable in the highest productivity as a seaweeds; so definitely 
seaweed has tremendous market and tremendous opportunity in Indian context as of now. Maybe 
I will I will devote complete lecture in the later lectures in a later say later you will find it. So, in 
the seaweed I will completely devote one lecture series just to let you guys know what what is the 
importance of seaweed at t his moment in Indian context.  
And the government of India is also putting a lot of effort on it. And we are also doing a lot of 
research on this field, like how we can introduce the seaweed in Indian context, and because India 
has a vast coastal line. So, if we can introduce if we can really properly utilize this vast coastal 
line, we can we can develop; we can very much improve our GDP by only culturing this kind of 
aquatic species.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:13)  
 
Seaweed species selection: the species of with a high growth rate and the tissue nitrogen 
concentration will be the best to choose. The ease of cultivation and the control of lifecycle is 
another important criteria. Resistance to the epiphytes and disease causing microorganisms; and 
the seaweed should be of local species. So, if we can, if we want the moment we want to have 
proper consideration for the type of seaweed that you need to culture, or type of seaweed that you 
need to check. So, you need to worry  about these basic criteria’s and all.  
Other factors, other internet applications the value of the biomass produced, which is definitely 
the quality of the tissue that it involves. And the for bioremediation, nutrient uptake, storage and 
growth. So, optima l system for optimal system will be considering the both; so that what does that 
mean? First of all, the biomass that you are getting out of culturing this kind of seaweeds and all. 
What we are going to do with it? It has a lot of economic benefits; it can  be used for production of 
agar, production of alginate and all.  
Not only that, there are various other chemicals that it can produce that it can, we can harvest out 
of it; and we can segregate out of it; and we can, we can use it for byproducts recovery f or personal 
care products, pharmaceuticals, et -cetera et -cetera. Other than that, it is a very good food products 
nowadays as a very good sea source or a seafood source. Other than that, at the end, if you do not 
have a very good quality seaweed and all; a t the end, what you can do? You can simply dry it and 
use it for fertilizer.  
You do not know how big of a change that you can get in your if you are doing land based 
agriculture; and if you are using the seaweed based extract or seaweed based fertilizer fo r your 
culture land or for your farm. It will drastically improve the quality of the soil; it will drastically 
improve the quality of the production of your yield or production of the yield of your target crop 
species.(Refer Slide Time: 27:15)  
 
Organic e xtractive sub -system: The filter feeders like the bivalves, they reduce the nutrient 
loadings by filtering and assimilating the particulate waste. As I already discussed, they use the 
filter feeding mechanism. And there are literature's which shows the 95 percent of the particles 
released from the aquaculture systems like a fish farms and the closed air recirculation systems are 
20 micron diameter; and they they will settle in the bottom of the pond. So, if that can be utilized, 
so filter feeders are select ive in extracting particles. That particles that this small particles can be 
utilized properly by introducing the filter feeders like bivalves and all.  
It can reduce the economy, it can reduce the environmental impact of the system overall pond. 
Also it wi ll increase the economic benefit like anything. The particle size of wastes from IMTA 
should be known for selecting a suitable bivalve species. So, based on the particle size of the waste 
that is present in your IMTA; based on that you can choose your biva lve species and so that that 
bivalve can easily assimilate or you can easily utilize the particle that is being released from the 
aquaculture; and they can utilize it and because of that we can have additional benefit out of it.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:31)  
 
Fed aquaculture species sub -system, where the finfish represents the only fed component of most 
IMTA systems. The only human provided input of nutrient energy to the systems; this species it 
provides the dissolved and the particulate nutrient and oxidati on reduction potential reducing 
compounds to the other component organisms.  
So, this finfish is actually not only helping getting rid of not only say suppose if this is a 
carnivorous one; it is utilizing the other fishes or not, does not matter. And if yo u want to have it 
optimally run, so you can even supply some additional sources of nutrients, additional feed to the 
system as well for survival survival of finfish.  
It can reduce the particulate nutrients and that can it can it can utilize it; so and also  the oxidation 
reduction potential reducing components. So, because of that, that place is well equipped, well 
how to say it would be like well dwelling in nature for other component organisms to survive; and 
also the revenue to the industry definitely. It  is the maximum revenue generating part this finfish; 
because it has a very high market value.  
Although this is also based on the fact it I am not, I cannot be guarantee about this (dis), this 
particular statement. Because if there are possibility of havin g some kind of exotic seaweeds which 
has a very high value, then even the finfish, the normal finfishes that is available in the market. 
The quality and the form of the nutrients, these are depending on the species, size and the feed 
formulation; so, defin itely based on that we go ahead with this.  
(Refer Slide Time: 33:07)  
 
So, what is the what are the pros and cons of IMTA? From all our discussions that we have, you 
guys have already have a better idea about what are the pros and cons of this IMTA system . So, 
first of all, it increase the profits, it improves the local economy, it improves the local economy; it 
form the natural crop insurance. There it can if it can mitigate the bio effluent bio -mitigation can 
also be happening. Effluent bio -mitigation me ans is the waste worst treatment that can also be 
possible in the system itself.  
The cons part of it the higher farm area is required, difficult to coordinate, higher investment 
definitely. So, definitely at the beginning you have a very high investment re lated to this kind of 
this kind of aquaculture systems. But, once you have it has a very low payback period, based on 
your design and all, you can design it. If you design it optimally, it has a very low payback period 
within a year or two or three year, y ou will get all your money back. All the investment back, and 
you will start getting a huge amount of revenue out of it. So that is possible.  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:13)  
 
 
So, let us come down to the conclusion. So, sustainable aquaculture farming systems are now 
gaining the prominence nowadays considering the environmental impacts of the aquaculture. So, 
this is very important why? This is one of the major reason why I thou ght of delivering this 
particular course to all of you. So, too so for you guys to remember that aquaculture in general the 
aquaculture practice has a huge environmental impact negatively in general. If you cannot do it 
sustainably, if you cannot do it env ironmentally benign way; so that can cause additional load to 
the climate, additional load to the earth’s ecosystem.  
Why not why to do that? Where there is a possibility there is a scientific explorations already 
available to eradicate these kind of issues . Why not we go for this kind of easy solutions, this kind 
of scientific advancement; we can we can in we can intake this kind of animals. We can utilize 
those advancement and we can go ahead with the for increase the production capacity. We can 
increase t he final product value and all, without compromising with the environment. That is what 
our targets should be in.  
Because that is why I choose of I think of I thought of actually delivering this course in NPTEL; 
so for all of you, for you, it will be the o ne one of a kind subject and that will be delivered. That is 
actually been delivering right now; so, you need to remember these things. So, two main types of 
sustainable aquaculture farming systems were discussed polyculture and IMTA. And coastal and 
maric ulture, algal culture, macroalgae or seaweed culture, and pearl culture will be discussed in 
the next constitutive class.  
So, that is all that we want to discuss in this particular lecture. So, these are the references that I 
think you should you can pause  the video and you can check this. You can check these details and 
it will be very much helpful for you to remember. You can go ahead with this paper and you can 
get the details about this discussion that we have in further. So, that is it for this lecture . See you, 
see you soon. Thank you.  
 