Advanced Agriculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture - 17  
Topic - Introduction to Shrimp  Culture  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:32)  
 
Hello everyone, welcome to the second lecture of the module 4, Introduction to Shrimp 
Culture for the course, Advanced Agricultural T echnology. My name is Professor Gourav 
Dhar Bhowm ick, I am a professor from the D epartment of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
depa rtment IIT, Kharagpur .  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:40)  
 So, the concepts that I wi ll be covering in this particular lecture is the introduction to the 
shrimp  culture, the site selection, the design of ponds for different types of shrimp culture 
systems, and the pond management systems required for the shrimp  culture.  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:56)  
 
That shrimp is like the most ly traded and the most, one of the most valuable marine products 
in the world today, it is called as a pinkish gold of the sea  because of its great taste, it s unique 
value realizations  and also the increasing demand like all over the globe. A nd also, these 
shrimp s actuall y, it accounts for more than 55 percent  of a total shrimp  production in a global 
scale is actually accounts for the farm shrimp s. So, the major the countries who are 
responsible for this kind of farm shrimp  production are China , Thailand, In donesia, India, 
Vietnam, Brazil , Ecuador and Bangladesh.  
In general, the type of species the same species that we found in India are as follows like the 
Penaeus  monodon,  Penaeus indicus,  Metapenaeus  ensis , etc, etc . So, you ma y heard  about 
the tiger prawn, white t iger prawn and all we already discussed about a little bit in last lecture 
material  and as well.  (Refer Slide Time:  2:05)  
 
So, in general  in India right now, almost 17 6,000 hectare of area is culture is actually used for 
culturing of different kinds of shrimp s, 91 percent  of is act ually used for cultivating the 
Litopenaeus vannamei  and 8 percent is for the Penaeus monodon  and 1 percent  is for 
Macrobrachium r osenberg ii. So, in general the Penaeus shrimp s, if you see this is the lateral 
view of Penaeus shrimp s, if you see its structure, so, it has this pleopods  if you see that this 
like, it has this pleopods,  you can see this, it has the specific structural difference between 
then the other type of shrimps  like it has this fourth abdominal seg ment which and also the 
dorsal c arina on its telson  region.  
(Refer Slide Time:  2:58)  
 So, this is the these are the different types of shrimp species that we normally culture in India 
like the local name is li ke the white prawn like the penaeus indicus , the tiger prawn like the 
penaeus monodon or pink shrimp or the metapenaeus dobsoni which is not very common, but 
still people  are culturing it in Ke rala and Karnataka regions, m arine shrimp s, karikad i brown 
shrimps,  a deep sea shrimp s etc. So, for each of the shrimp s different kind  of this important 
shrimp species, they ha ve their own peak season. So , in general the white prawn penaeus 
indicus  you can almost grow throughout the season like throughout the year  only other than 
the monsoon season.  
Whereas, in case of t iger prawn  it can grow it has a peak  season of around November to May , 
pink shrimp s July to October. So, for different types of species it has its own peak season and 
the distribution if you see ma inly the Kerala , Karnataka region or the one which is mostly the 
you can find the abundance of this kind of different type of shrimp  species in India .  
Other than that, and if you go to the, if you come to the West Bengal or Odisha coastal region 
you will find that production of t iger prawn  a lot. If you further go to the Andhra Pradesh , 
Odisha this reason if you like go for the southern side  of the eastern coast like metapenaeus 
mono ceros , so, there you will find his brown shrimp s production the abundance of brown 
shrimp  production in this region.  
(Refer Slide Time:  4:45)  
 
So, in general the crustaceans like the shrimp  they kind of grow in the process of molding 
which is like the shed ding of the exoskeleton so, they keep on shedd ing the exoskeleton at 
regular in tervals throughout their life, w ell definitely it depends . In case of young shrimp s, they a re usually more like 2 to 3 times a day, while as like juvenile stage it can the frequency 
goes up to 3 to 25 days. So, after 3 to 25 days, they keep on shedding their exoskeleton or 
that process is called the moulting  process. So, by which they are they keep on grow during 
their till their maturation stage.  
The major sequence of events in the cycle is actually involved the mineral and organic 
reserve accumulation, the elimination of old shell followed by the formation of the new 
exoskeleton the process which I already mentioned the molding or the egg diocese along with 
the uptake of water .  
And other than that the rearrangement of t he organic mat rices  along with the deposition of 
inorganic salts, which also results in the molecular strengthening of the exoskeleton and 
majorly their exoskeletons are made up of different types of calcium and magnesium 
products this mostly this type of species . And also , they have a they do they like when their 
tissues actually keep on growing in this kind of species as they kind  a replace their fluid the 
body fluid very frequently and this body fluid replacement is a major process for their tissue 
growt h and all .  
(Refer Slide Time:  6:16)  
 
So, in general if you see the whole cycle of the penaeid  shrimp s like right from the egg which 
up to say like 24 hour of period and then it is called nauplius  period the n in the nauplius if 
you see it has the 5 to 6 instars  or in 2 to 3 days of sequence, then it is called pro tozoea  stage 
from there  it stays for like another three instars  in 3 to 4 days. And then it goes to the mysi s and then post larva and then the juvenile stage . So, it i s from juvenile stage to the mature final 
maturation stage requires around 180 to 300 days.  
So, all total around  350 around 3 60 days require the max form the for your year  long 
production from your initial the pre-preparation management to the execution stage like after 
the maturation stages in reached the if you want to netting  out all the materi als, so, all this 
procedure would  take around one year of time period.  
(Refer Slide Time:  7:22)  
 
So, in general when th ere are different types of shrimp  species, shrimp species  where it 
required the either the hormonal or the environmental manipulation for their building 
lithopanaeus  vannamei or this fenneropana eus chinensis and all, s o, this type of spaces is they 
do not need they can they can be readily natural mate and spawn in captivity. But whereas, in 
case of penaeus monodon , in case of lithopanaeus vannamei , the wild s tokes one they need 
some hormonal or environmental manipulation f or reliable breeding in captivity.  (Refer Slide Time:  8:09)  
 
So, before you start any culture of any shrimp , so, what are the consideration what are the 
factors that you need to worry about , remember whenever you will be starting your own farm 
in this k ind of aquaculture practice using aquaculture species and all , you have to worry about 
the site selection first, that is the very first and foremost criteria about the site from which 
type of species that definitely you have to search for at the beginning,  then followed up thing 
will be like when you will be designing a fa rm w hat is the topography of that fa rm? I mean 
like the what is the topography, what is the natural ground elevation , let at least that you have 
to understand like from the mean sea level how what is the elevation from there you have to 
maintain at least 1 to 3 meters above the mean sea level this ground elevation.  
Because if you a re not maintaining this particular heig ht what will happen , mostly they 
cultured in a coastal region in a tide fed  condition . In a tide fed condition, because in the high 
tide and the low tide this fluctuation though in case of high tide situation the water should 
come from the sea to your pond  or to your culture area.  
So, that provision you have to provide using a proper design of sluice gate and all and proper 
designing of a canal. So, using a proper canal design and the proper sluice gate design and 
maintaining the ground elevation of around  like in the range between 1 to 3 meter above the 
mean sea level is like the standard practice.  
Second thing not less than one meter above the highest high tide level, what is highest high 
tide level and what is lowest low tide level. So, the high  tide le vel, low tide  level it  fractured 
diurnally. However, this highest high tide  level, it i s like the is the some particular days of year, s o what happened, the  tide level reaches its maximum . So, when the difference between 
the difference from its mean sea level average means like a mean sea level to the highest high 
tide level is the maximum.  
And the same happened in the lowest low tide level also. So, in general there is a  average 
high tide lev el, in general there is highest high tide level, so we will be discussing  more in 
details about all these particular t erminologies because there are  lot of things to discuss about 
it. If I want to go in  details, so but in this particular subject does  not g ive me enough  
provision or the time period to go on more discussion about it . So anyway, maybe in future 
we wi ll discuss about it in details in aquaculture, design of aquaculture farms and practices.  
So, the site when which you will be choosing it should be the near to the natural waterways 
like sea , rivers or the stream  region and with it has to have at least a minimum vegetation 
cover to reduce the erosion , soil erosion practice , soil erosion  and also to get rid of the 
erosion that can cause by the wave  thus it can be the sea wave , it can be the, because of the 
wind erosion, because of the wind factor and all .  
It has to has a  easy site access to the roadway. So, that you can make it in a square or 
rectangular shape and have to have you can have a tank with a proper broad weight so, that 
the transportation will transportation carriage and all they can come or even human transpo rt 
manual like human transportation is also possible .  
It has to have a particular width top  width  and I wi ll be discussing about in details like what 
should be the top width  based on the size of the pond and the best of the size of your farm . 
Not only tha t like climatic situation is also a matter to really worry about , short dry season 
and moderate rainfall throughout the year s the best suited for the shrimp  farming , if it has a 
long dry season,  what will happen , just imagine if it has a long dry season be cause of the 
sunlight because of the presence of the sunlight what will happen , the water will keep on 
evaporating.  
So, the if the water first of all you are using your shrimp  farming is done in tide fed  farm 
mainly on the pump fed farm also it is possible , in general I am discussing about in general 
tide fed farm when the sea level rises that water because of the high tide situation the water  
from the sea it reaches your fa rm.  
So, when it reaches your farm, so, it is a high saline water it is anyw ay it is high saline water 
no matter whatever the coastal interference it does have. So, but with the evaporation, what will happen , the water will evaporate,  the salinity of your existing farm will keep on 
increasing, which is also not good . Those shrimp  can sustain a huge amount of range of 
salinity level but still, if it has a really long dry season  then what will happen the water will 
keep on evaporating and because of that the salinity level will keep on increasing in your 
farm practice,  in your farmin g pond or farming culture tanks , so, that is not a good practice.  
So, you have to worry about you have to think about the you have to choose place or 
somehow manage situation when there is like areas which are having short dry season  and a 
moderate rainfall more much if it has a very high rainfall area that is also not suitable , you 
know the reason. I f it is a high rainfall area, what will happening because of the rainfall, the 
pond will be diluted the pond  water will be diluted , the salinity  level grows highly like it will 
decrease like anything it will reduce  like anything and that is also not good for your shrimp s.  
So, shrimp  needs a moderate level of salinity  for their survival. So, that  has to be maintained 
in your culture pond o r culture farm . So, these are the things that you have to worry about 
before choosing a farm , aquaculture  farming especially the shrimp  farming . Infrastructure, 
not need  to say about it, you have to have a proper accessibility by road , by waterways 
whateve r means so, to have a proper supervision and also you can easily transport the 
materials and the products or the final products .  
It has to have a proper electricity supply like availability of the reliable and relatively cheap 
power source has to be avail able with a backup generator as a secondary power source and 
also if it is possible nowadays people government of India is really pushing all the fa rmers of 
the fisherm en all the farm practitioners to go ahead with the renewable energy sources .  
So, what you can do , near to your shrimp  farming you can just simply shared it with the solar 
panels and or simply you can use the wind energy because anyway it is a coastal region there 
is you can have a , the wind will definitely flow all the time. So, I mea n like either from the 
land to the sea or the sea to the land depending upon the time of the day.  
So, you will get a lot of wind energy and it is really, really a good practice if you want to go 
ahead with the designing all the energy demand for your farm  through the renewable energy 
sources , either solar , either wind , either you because you a re near to the coastal regions you 
can use the wave energy as well yo u just simply designed those wave  platforms and it will 
give you enough energy sources for you to  supply energy for all the necessary equipments all 
the necessary farm necessities for your farm. So, that is also doable and now it is common are also different government  practices are also available , you can go and ask the experts 
available in this field, so, to desig n you with this kind of systems .  
(Refer Slide Time:  16:01)  
 
So, proper security is another important thing that you have to worry of because otherwise 
what will happen that there may be people from outside they will come and steal your catch . 
So, that is not a good practice anyway, but you have to worry about that also , you  have to 
have a proper fencing and all .  
Availability of the proper equipment , labor , commercial , feed and supplies definitely you 
have to have a labor cheap labor as possible or not only cheap , he or she has to be well versed 
with the techniques and all the necessary , what to say troubleshooting practices that is 
possible for your farming , for your farm and all .  
Proper equipments are needed , proper aeration, proper ae rators and all proper pump systems 
and all the commercial feed has to be available with the minimal cost and it has to be it has to 
have all the possible nutrients possible for your shrimp  to grow faster. And as it is said like 
the more you supply the good  amount of animal feed especially to the shrimp s they can grow 
very fast and it is really a very that is a reason why it is called like the pinkish gold like in a 
sea. So, it has a lot of money and a lot of people are earning in crores  in even in India als o 
with this kind of farming practices .  
Water supply you have to have a water supply clean pollution free water supply both 
freshwater and brackish water because brackish water cultur e water brackish water that you 
are supplying to your farm it i s actually nothing but the high tide sea water. So, before it reaches to your farm, you have to have a proper how to say means of filtering out all the see 
larger sized foreign particles which you do no t need in your system definitely and the all the 
other  filtering mechanisms that you can have to get rid of the materials  which are detrimental 
to your farming or to your farm or can cause choke or can cause some further hazard to your 
system . 
So, that you have t o think about it for a while we wi ll be designi ng just before the sluice  gate 
or just after this before the sluice  gate or after the sluice  gate depending upon the size of the 
pond, you can design those filters and all. S oil condition definitely it has to have clay or 
loamy soil with more than 90 perce nt clay, why you need more than 90 percent of clay?   
First of all, it kind  a give you  some give you a what to say it i s like it will give a kind of 
concreteness to your system first of all to your pond bottom to your farm bottom , why, 
because first of all, there is a chances of when the there is a low tide condition the water may 
leach out from the from your pond if it is some it is higher amount of sandy’ s provided and 
because of the sand, the leaching efficiency leaching possibility will be higher and because of 
that, you will lose the farm pond very farm water very easily.  
And at the same time, if there is like high tide condition highest  high tide condition, if your 
form is already filled up with the water you can close the squeeze  gate,  no matter wha t the 
sea water level is your dy ke can your pond bottom has to be des igned in such a way, s o, there 
will be no further penetration of this lower vicinity water to your pond.  
So, that you have to make sure and for that you need to have a clay or lo amy soil of around 
more than 90 percent  of clay which gives us this stability , this concentrated effect then this 
pH of around 6.5 to 8.5 is necessar y because sometimes what happen when it goes above 8.5 
say the present because of the presence of different ammonia called pr oduct and all or say 
below 6.5 o r like it may happen due to the different reason  of nitrogen species that can be 
present in the aquaculture wastewater because of different phenomena , first of all uneaten  
fish, uneaten feed, the excreta and all these things.  
So, anyway the soil condition whe n we wi ll be thinking about it, it has to have a 6.5 to 8.5 . I 
was thinking about the water but it is actually the this is the soil page that we a re discussing 
here, 6.2 to 8.5 i t has to have this range . Due to the porosity with s andy and silty soil should 
be avoided as they may result in the ocean , seepage of water along with ease  waste  
penetration into the soil. So, these are the things that I have already discussed. Acid sulfate soil is  obviously unsuitable for the shrimp  culture, because that will ca use the different kind  
of irritation diseases for the shrimp s. The mangrove soil is also not suitable due to the 
accumulation of the hydrogen sulfide and ammo nia at the bottom of the pond.  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:58)  
 
Optimum water quality parameters for say like penaeus monodon cult ure is as follows the 
dissolved oxygen concentration which is like amount of oxygen present in your farming  
water has to be in the range of 3 .5 to say like 4 ppm or like mi lligram per liter, salinity 10  to 
25 ppt, water temperature around  26 to 32 degrees Celsius, pH 6.8 to 8.7 .  
Total nitrite nitrogen has to be 1.0 ppm, better be less than that total ammonia less than 1 
ppm.  What are the major sources of this  ammonia nitrate , definitely the ammonia is first of 
all the uneaten feed, it has a very high amount of protein sources that will convert to the 
ammonia and all like because of the different kind  of bacteria’s  and then this what they do 
they again this the re is a c hances of having different kind  of nitrifying bacteria, which will 
again work on the ammonia connect to genetic will convert it to the nitrite or nitrate.  
So, nitrate is really detrimental even ammonia, if it is in free ammonium f orm tha t is 
definitely not a good sign . So, these are the thin gs that we need to worry about. B OD, 
biological oxygen demand has to be less than 10 ppm, chemical oxygen demand has to be 
less than 70 ppm,  transparency at least 35 centimeter what does that mean , you coul d see with 
your naked eyes at least 35 centimeters below the surface of the water body. So, it depends 
upon the suspended solid level  and also depends upon the like  the amount of definitely the 
suspended solids which will cause the turbidity and which will  cause this type of transparency issues and also , so that you have to worry about. So, that is another reason why 
sandy soil is not preferred in this kind of situation in this  kind of farming practices. C arbon 
dioxide level has to be less than 10 ppm and s ulfide has to be less than around 0.003 ppm.  
(Refer Slide Time:  23:00)  
 
When we design a shrimp , suppose a pond  system any pond  we a re designing it will depend 
upon the type of shrimp  culture system . What do I mean by the type of shrimp  culture 
system? W e have discussed in earlier lectures, there are different types of cultural practices in 
aquaculture , extensive which is like very least hu man intervention is required it i s like very 
huge area with all  the natural amenities possible there presence there, semi intensive, 
intensive etc, etc.  
So, here we wi ll be discussing the I will show you I wi ll discuss with you the what will be the 
optimum design criteria ’s for these different type  of shrimp  culture systems, whether it be 
extensive, whether it be semi in tensive or be the intensive one. So, in case of extensive 
shrimp  cultur e systems, we have to have a it i s not mandatory, but it has to have a irregular 
shape pond  of more than 1.5 hectare, what is hectare , 10 to the power 4 square meter. So, it 
has to have  a more than that size containing a peripheral ditch of width of around 4 to 10 
meter for the new transportation purpose and a height of around 40 to 80 centimeter it can go 
up to 1 meter also.  
The ponds  are filled with the gravity flow water generally  during the high tide period. And 
the natural seed s are normally included and left for like 60 to 90 d ays in excess of additional seeds stocking  and feeding and the stocking density can be 0.5 to 5 pieces per square meter. 
And such ponds  are normally usually partially harvested, why it is not comp letely harvested?  
Definitely it i s a very common sense because if you completely harvest it , the next season 
there wi ll be no like there will be you a re not getting for the culture at all from y our pond . So, 
it is partially harvested and especially when all the p otential , the brood stocks  are properly 
left sometimes in the pond. So , far there is no further harvest further harvest harvesting 
period and all for the next season. In  case of semi inte nsive one, it i s not as high as in more 
than 1.5 hectare, but if it i s somewhere lies between 1 to 1.5 hectare and constructed with the 
dikes capable of holding 1 to 1.5 meter deep water .  
(Refer Slide Time:  25:31)  
 
And with a 10 to 15 p ost la rva per square meter of stocking density and in general sometimes 
why it is c alled semi -intensive , remember, you have to supply you have to have you need to 
provide some amount of human intervention like you provide some amount of commercial 
feed, because sometime s what happen  the natural feed that is available for the pond is not 
sufficient enough, so, or maybe the stocking density has because the stocking density is much 
higher. So, because of that they need additional amount of feed. So, then we supply the 
comme rcial diet and all and we normally harvest it within 90 to 120 days after the stocking.  
In case of intensive culture , it is it normalized between 0.5 to 1 hectare and can hold up to 1.5 
to 2 meter deep water. And it  is actually the intensive one, what does that mean, you a re 
having very high-density  culture of your targeting species and with a stocking density can 
reach up to 60 of the number  of post larva per square meter . So, it generally requires our reservoir  of like, say no less than 30 percent  of the pond area, the feeding rate will be like 4 to 
6 times per day, you can easily imagine like the that with the feeding rate it i s like 4 to 6 
times per day , so amount of human intervention that it requires.  
It needs a strong aeration  that is one of the major issue because it i s a continuous process and 
it is an intensive process intensive or huge number of target  species  are dwelling in your 
farm. So, they need huge they consume huge amount of dissolved oxygen and the  presence of 
no natural alternative can provide them with the additional amount of oxygen that they 
require. So, in that case, we need to provide them with the aerator s and all , though it can be 
surface paddlewheel aerators and all , it can be submersible o ne, somehow you need to 
provide them with the additional amount of oxygen that oxygen wil l be dissolved like 
actually we a re providing with them providing actually air.  
So, from a ir whatever that like around 21 percent  is of 20.9 percent  is of  oxygen that is 
available that will dissolve in the water and that water is actually known it is enriched with 
the dissolved oxygen and which is actually required it has to have a range of around 3 to 4, 3 
to 5 ppm of DO as we discussed.  
So, that has to b e maintained. In case of open system , a very high supply of good quality 
water needs to be maintained, it requires the  water exchange of more than 20 percent  of the 
total pond  volume and  stocking density of around 60 p ost lava per square meter and shrimp  
can grow to around like 25 to 30 gram within 120 days which is like within 4 months  and 
though it is the less favored  method of culture by the farmers .  
(Refer Slide Time:  28:32)  
 And we discussed about recirculation system in earlier lectures also we take the water out of 
the pond, we treat it and we like kind of give it back to the system. So, that i s how we are 
minimizing the water requirement , we are utilizing the we are somehow reducing the 
economic impact though they it comes with some amount of capital investment in beginning 
when you design the  this kind of treatment units.  
So, anyway , so the stoc king 40 to 50 percent  of the pond area in general we may require for 
constructio n of the water reservoir treatment pond , sedimentation pond , drainage canals , etc 
and you may have some additional amount of small treatment  units as well and water 
treatment units  as well.  
So, it also has it can also sustain with the stocking density of around 30 to 50 post larva  per 
square meter of around culturing  period of around 4 months. Then there comes the minimal 
water exchange  systems. So , in case of minimal water exchange systems, when the 
recirculation along with the recirculation system what i s the positive thing about it like in this 
particular case, it involves minimal water exchanged and it to reduce the contact with the 
outside water. What does that mean? Outside water , what is the outside water here , it is a 
clean seawater .  
The clean seaw ater when it is filled with a clean seawater it when it is filled with a sea water  
and high tide situation, it does no t come along with the foreign living organism it does come 
with the foreign living organism . So, it may cause different kind  of disease -causing  
microorganisms it can come with some predators, which are not beneficial or harm can be 
harmful for detrimental fo r your target species.  
So, that i s why the minimal water emission system are the design where once the seawater is 
captured i n high tide  situation then we put the sluice gate off and when we try to use the same 
water again and again in the system, so to minimize the water exchange with the open with 
the seawater .  
So, that will reduce kind of that will eradicate the any kind of competition or the predator’s  
effect or the any kind of how to say like the harmful microorganisms that ca n cause diseases 
to your system. I t can be sto cking density of around 30 post larva’s  possible in this k ind of 
systems with almost 100 m ore than 100 d ays of culturing is required with an a verage weight 
of 10 to 20 meter .  (Refer Slide Time:  31:09)  
 
 
So, other than that, when we go for the pond management, the first is the pond preparation 
waste accumulated in the pond during the previous farming cycle must be removed followed 
by the conditioning of soil and water before stocking the new cycle definitely . Pond cleaning 
it involves with organic and phosphatic waste that you have to remove from the bottom it can 
be done by dry method you just complet ely dry the pond and then clean it or you can do it by 
wet method where the dry method you just have to keep it in like some sunlight for 10 to 30 
days dry in the sun and manually or mechanically you can remove the waste harvest and then 
solid waste and in  case of wet method it is more favorable because it takes shorter time 
because in this case we go for we flushed out the waste using the pressure washing and we it 
is suitable for the surface areas also an d sedimentation pond for the settlement, we can 
involve the sedimentation pond  for the  settlement of the suspended solid at the end .  (Refer Slide Time:  32:09)  
 
Another important thing in this particular field that I wa nt to discuss about is just lim ing. 
After cleaning the pond, the pond is filled with wh atever the leftover with the flushing out of 
the debris and increasing the pH of around 7. And then we foll owed it with the agriculture 
lime on the calcium carbonate on the d olomite and used to when the pH is of the water is near 
neutral and we sometimes use a hydrated lime when the pH is below 5.  
So, these lim es are actually used to depending upon the pH of the soil and it is it has a lot of 
important aspects of utilizing th e treatment of the like we call it conditioning of pond , we call 
it conditioning of the pond before starting your form . It is very important to pro vide it with 
the different kind  of calcium minerals in general we go for this calcium carbonate or calcium 
hydroxide etc at the rate of around  100 kg per hectare per day to maintain the adequate pH .  (Refer Slide Time:  33:06)  
 
We have to eradicate the predators , we can use the lining method , we can use the T ea Seed  
powder to use the for killing the fish , snails we can easily eliminate by using the quick limes 
or the calcium oxide . Hypochlorite doses we can do to eradicate both the vertebrates and 
invertebrates from your systems and application of hypochlorite in the farm  with the properly 
aerated  followed  by the fertilization is on day three is the perfect way to do this kind of job 
and then you start stocking of post larva around  day 7.  
(Refer Slide Time:  33:40)  
  
 
So, that is how you prepare the pond when we go for the culturing of the shrimp s in you r 
farm or in your tide fed  farm or pump fed farm  whatever  you a re designing, which is utilizing 
the seawater coming from the coastal region. So, in conclusion, we can say we discussed 
about different countries which are the major producers of shrimp s like China, Thailand, 
Indonesia, India, and what are the type of species , the most important commercial shrimp  
species like the litopenaeus vannamei or the penaeus monodon  that is famous in India and 
what are the factors that involves while we will discuss whil e we selecting a particular site for 
our farm and what are the climatic and the consideration that we need to design we need to 
think about before going for pond  construction.  
We wi ll be discussing more in details in next coming lecture as well. So, the m ajor 
takeaways, again you can see the pH is also important factor , the soil conditioning is very important lim ing and all be disc ussed. You better think like it i s a very important 
information ’s that we discussed in this particular lecture and really take this. Remember this 
information. This is the re ferences that I used, s o thank you see you in the next lecture . 