Advanced Agriculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture - 18  
Topic - Introduction to Shrimp Culture  (Contd.)  
Hello e veryone, my name is Professor Gourav Dhar  Bhowmick, I a m from the A gricultural 
and Food  department of IIT , Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:35)  
 
So, welcome to the A dvanced Agriculture T echnology course, for the lecture 3 of module 4, 
in this lecture also I wi ll be continuing the introduction to the shrimp  culture lecture only. So, 
there I wi ll be covering the introduction to the stocking density during the shrimp  farming , 
the nutrient requirement, the how to harvest the shrimp , what are the advantages of sever al 
important commercial shrimp  species  culture , what are the problems which are associated 
with this culture and how to kind of troubleshoot them.  (Refer Slide Time:  1:03)  
 
So, when we discuss about the stocking  of shrimp  culture especially the seed selection and 
all, in general size of around say like seeds of around 15 to 20 p ost larva are recommended. 
So, I recommended for stocking in pond  though it based upon the type of culture definitely , 
remember we discussed in the  last lectur e, what type of culture that we a re doing culturing 
system it is an extensive , semi intensive or intensive even in intensive there are like open 
culture , there are a recirculation , recirculatory and  so on, so  forth, minimum waste utilization 
and minimum water utilization etc.  
So, based on the type of culturing systems, the stocking density actually it varies . So, in 
general the 15 to 20 p ost larva  recommended for stoc king in pond  and with this post larva  
indicated by the presence of 4 to 6 spine in the rostrum . In case of healthy post la rva it should 
have a muscle to gut ratio of around 4 is to 1 in the sixth abdominal segment and the 
thickness of the gut should be almost similar to the thickness of the muscle. So, then only it 
will be considered as proper it reaches the post larval situation , post larval condition . 
Technically see it from first and the second spawning of a brood stock having uniform size 
can be used .  (Refer Slide Time:  2:29)  
 
In terms of morphology, the post larva should possess a normal trunk , rostrum and the 
appendages, abdominal muscles should be clear and no body parts should have any kind of 
discoloration or erosion or in disorientation . The guard must be full of food and carapace  
should be filled with the muscle .  
The color in general the if it is a light gre y, black or brown or dark brown co lored, it has a 
high survival of  the growth rate but in case of red or pink coloration, it indicates that it is 
under the stress condition. So, when we talk about the its behav ior, in general the health y 
seeds can swim straight and it rapidly respond to the external stimuli like a tap on the side of 
the basin or any kind of external stimuli are likely to refer stuck them they will just they will 
like kind of they will sense and they will get back to the change that their direction .  (Refer Slide Time:  3:26)  
 
When healthy , the seed s can actively swim against the current if you make a kind of wielding 
motion it will make a steering in the water so, it can directly swim against the current and 
click to the  site. S o, to not to blow away like when we wi ll be doing swelling or manually or 
in a natural situation.  
External fouling  seeds  should not be contaminated with external parasites, bacteria or any 
other fouling organisms it has to be pathogen free , any case of viral occlusion bodies  should 
be checke d in the seeds,  a large number of occlusions in the seed indicates a  stress situation . 
So, you have to worry abou t these factors as well when we wi ll be choosing a particular seeds 
for your system.  
(Refe r Slide Time:  4:09)  
 In general,  the nutrient  requirement for shrimp  culture it depends on the size. If you see this 
particular table, when it reaches around 0.5 gram up to 0 .5 gram when it is like the size of 
around 0. 0 like 0.5  when there is no zero like from its birth to the 0.5 it has a requirement of 
around 45 percent of protein, 7.5 percent of fat, no more than 4 percent  fiber , no more than 15 
percent ash content, no more than 12 percent moisture and like minimum 1.5 percent  
phosphorus content. Again,  the calcium conten t has to also be limited to 2.3 percent .  
This percentages are almost equal other than the amount of protein and fat that requires , so in 
case of the along  with the when  its keep on increase in the size the  shrimp size the protein 
requirements is literally goes a little bit  down and as well as the fat  requirement but others 
can be as a as it is of.  
(Refer Slide Time:  5:11)  
 
Harvesting of shrimp,  so how you will harvest the shrimp, so now you have you are 
providing the feed now you a re culturing your species  in a particular very proper way 
everything is done . Now, your culture species has reached to his maturation stage . When it 
comes to his maturation stage now we have to harvest it . So, harvesting should not damage or 
contaminate the shrimp  with waste that i s the very important thing again an d rapid harvesting 
sometimes it i s helpful because rapid harvesting if you do it reduces the any chances of 
bacterial contamination in your stock .  
Also harvesting is done in general the two ways first by draining the pond followed by 
collecting the shrimp  using a bag net . So, suppose you just kind  a get it on one side of the dyke  and open the sluice gate and it goes to the drainage canal the water is going to the 
drainage canal you put a bag net  there.   
So, what will happen , all the shrimp s can easily be collected as the easiest way, one of the 
easiest way . The pond shou ld be designed to complete the d raining within 4 to 5 hours and 
the flow has to be designed in that way also, the base time for this kind of harvesting is early 
morning and the collected  shrimp  must be removed the collector shrimp  must be removed at 
regular intervals , so, to prevent the any kind of damage to their body.  
Another method is by netting the shrimp  from the pond. I n general, we do it for the extensive 
systems becau se in extensive systems, we do no t want to collect al l the culture  species  at the 
same goal , so in that kind of cases, it i s better to provide them w ith a large seine  net or the 
small electric net also to collect the shrimp s from the po nd.  
(Refer Slide Time:  6:52)  
 
In case of collection of in case of this net ting the pond, the water level of the pond needs to 
be reduced to at least 0.5 to 0.75-meter -deep , less advantag eous method as chances of there i s 
a problem with this because it i s a less advantageous method as a chance of contamination is 
very high. This method takes a lon g time to complete also so that is why it i s better to go for 
the method by when we use the completely open the drainage canal , open the sluice get to 
pass the water through the drainage canal  and have to put the bag net  on it. A fter harvesting 
either of these methods, the remaining shrimp s are handpicked a fter drainin g the pond. And if 
it is like ex tensive culture systems, we do no t do it at all.  The harvested shrimp  can be quickly killed by dipping them into the ice d water, we call it 
temperature sh ock. That i s the most famous way of doing that. So , to remain its taste and it s 
or like odor as it is and to prolong this also to prolong the storage and to prevent any kind of 
damage that this culture species .  
(Refer Slide Time:  7:58)  
 
What are the advantages of the Penaeus  monodon  culture it can attain a very large size. So, 
the shrimps  can weigh up to 40 , 75 to 145 gram per piece and they are the fastest growing 
shrimp s among all the tested  shrimp s for the culture . In about 5 to 6 months that juveniles 
have around 3 centimeter in lengt h can be grown up to 75 to 100 gram i n ponds  within 5 to 6 
months. So, that is a reason why it is a favorable  pond  practices in Indian coastal regions and 
there is a chances of growing it further  there is a chances of further extension of this kind of 
market in Indian scenario because of considering the amount of large coastal region that we 
have in India .  
They can tolerate a wide range of salinity  0.2 to 70 ppt. S alinity in range of ranges from 10 to 
25 ppt has no substantial effect on  growth when sufficient food is available. At very low 
salinity  the grow th is reported to be slower as  remember I told you like the salinity is a very 
important factor thou gh it can tolerate but it does no t make their life easier when the salinity 
level is less than 10 or more than 25 their grow th can be affected.  (Refer Slide Time:  9:20)  
 
So, they can tolerate a temperature of around up to 37.5 degrees Celsius and as low as 12 
degrees Celsius. It grows rapidly when it is fed with animal o r the vegetable proteins and all 
and favorable food  conversion ratios are seen in this kind of species . And they are quite tough 
and do not get mushy when due to the handling issues and  all.  
(Refer Slide Time:  9:42)  
 
Second type of species is the advantages of Penaeus  indicus culture is like they can grow 
fairly large size also brings a decent price also for their farmers , for the farmers or for 
culturing the farm owners. Young ones are fairly fast growing in nature when culturing  tanks 
at a density of around 15  per square meter and they can reach up to 14 grams within 16 
weeks . When growing  polyculture along with milk fish in earthen ponds, the male shrimp s can grow around 12 gram while the females can grow up to 28 grams in 160 days, so,  almost 
twice as the siz e of the male . T 
They have a very high survival rate up to the first 3 months of growth and it can reach to a 
size up around 10 centimeter and relatively easy maturation of females in captivity can be 
witnessed . Relatively easy procurement of gravid female s is possible in case of Penaeus  
indicus from the wild because in numbers because of sufficient enough to oper ate in 
hatchery .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:44)  
 
Because of that  they make the harvesting easy as they can move out of pond along w ith the 
water disc harge. I t requires a very low amount of food surprisingly  and also only around 40 
percent  of the protein that requires then the other species demonstrating good growth in the 
much better growth in the intensive culture. However, they relatively have a very thin 
exoskeleton providing greater edible portions of the meat to the total weight than any other 
kinds of shrimp species .  (Refer Slide Time:  11:16)  
 
So, what is the third one, let u s discuss about the advantages of Penaeus  vannamei  culture, 
why am discussing about all this specific species  because these are the species  that we 
normally in Indian context, we culture and there is a possibility of culturing this kind of 
species because of the enough like how to say just profit environmental conditions prevailing 
in the Indian scenario. So, and also, they can give you a pre tty high economic return if you 
can cul ture it properly scientifically.  
What are the advantages of this vannamei culture so, they can grow as fast as monodon, 
Penaeus  monodon  but weighing up around 20 gram in intensive culture and with a very high 
stockin g density can be prevailed in pond  culture it can go up to 150 per square meter. In case 
of recirculating tank culture , it can go up to 400 per square meter, can we imagine it i s a huge 
amount. But it is doable and because of that, it gives you a very high  economic return and 
very well definitely with the proper design and also it can tolerate a very wide range of 
salinity as low as 0.5 ppt  to 45 ppt, but again the proper salinity range if you can provide it 
will grow faster .  
So, it will not be in stress c ondition, though it will not get killed or it will not be like it will 
not get killed at least when the salinity level goes below because of certain reason or it goes 
up because of certain situation or certain reason . In general,  they a re tolerant to low 
temperatures up to 15 degrees Celsius thus can be found in the cold season.  
And also, it is a type of species that we can think about growing in the temperate regions in 
like European and  North American context as well. I t requires a very low animal protein feed only 20 to 35 person in comparison to the other Penaeus  species resulting in a lesser 
operational costs and also a better food conversion ratio around 1.2 .  
(Refer Slide Time:  13:13)  
 
It has a very high  meat yield  as like the monodon  and disease -free larva can be produced due 
to availability  of specific pathogen free brood  stock that is available with the experts and 
available with the collection of different authorities in India.  
(Refer Slide Time:  13:34)  
 
If yo u see the area and the production of Penaeus  vannamei  in India during the 2009 to 2015 
it keeps on increasing , 2014 -15 it drops a little bit but at around like if you say in terms of 
area, it i s almost 200,000 hecta re of area is now well utilized in Indian context and the production in turns is around it goes up to 350,000 tons as of now in 2015  the production of 
the shrimps  
(Refer Slide Time:  14:04 ) 
 
This is a very standard estimation of shrimp  cultivation per hectare with USD and this 
conversion  was used around 70 rupees, 1 USD to 70 rupees , 70 rupees and when the 
discussion is done with only for the Penaeus  monodon and for the vannamei species. F or the 
feet cost seed the medicine and fertilizer energy labor these are the var iable cost and the fi xed 
cost, the interest the total the depreciation on the fixed capital , the repairs on the maintenance, 
permanent labor , interest on the fixed capital considering all those parameters we have in the 
research paper by Nisar et a l, 2021.  
If you go I wi ll show you the reference. So , you can go ahead and study by yourself, and to 
get much detailed idea about how this cost estimation of fa rming is done, because of the time 
constraint, I cannot go in details about those things. But I really suggest you to go a nd study 
this paper where you can get much more details about how to do these kind of calculations 
and how to design a farm and what are the cost estimations that involves with it .  (Refer Slide Time: 15:26)  
 
What are the problems associated with the shrimp culture , definitely the first thing is the 
pollution in the tropical climate, it takes around 3 to 6 months to raise the marketable size 
change resulting in a constant discharge of wastewater containing organic waste, antibiotic 
chemicals that can poll ute the nearby coastal estuaries and the groundwater .  
What we need to do to get rid of this kind of situations or the problems, go ahead with the 
recirculating type of treatment units. So , recycling type of culture systems, what it does, it 
cleans the wat er which is the for during th is 6 months of culture period, and provide its back 
to the to your farm. Though it  is not possible all the time a nd also, it requires  a huge amount 
of scientific involvement, experts  involvement and all but believe me it is very good for the 
ecosystem because the environment, it i s good for your economic higher economic return as 
well.  
Salt from the economy shrimp  farms and ponds can also seep into the agricultural land and 
into the groundwater changing the hydrology of the wetland ecosystems completely 
sometimes what it happens th ough I already mentioned you it i s better to have a proper at 
least more than 90 percent  of the clay soil on the bottom of your farm, but still sometimes 
what happened because of some cracks and the default features the water can seep through 
and it can go and charge the groundwater . When it charged the groundwater especially 
suppose there is a aquifer there , when it reaches the aquifer where it contains the fresh water 
of like with almost no salinity, but that saline water comes in contact with them and it comes 
with different kinds of other ions as well.  So, it will kinds of kind of completely pollute that aquifer and because of that, it s omehow 
the suppose  you a re using that aquifer water for your irrigation purposes in here by 
aquaculture agricultural land, so definitely that you will not get it anymore. So , that i s the 
kind of environmental hazard that it can create.  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:26)  
 
So, do no t worry about it, there are  lot of troubleshooting measures that we can do and we 
designed the we know we can design the dy ke in such a way. So, we designed the bottom in 
such a way there are proper consolidation methods and technology which are already 
available. So , to reduce the seepage loss , reduces any kind of possibility of groundwater 
recharge by yo ur farming  water and also the dy ke also it can be the embankment  design is 
also standard enough now, if you design it properly, it will not let you see p the water through 
any either to any direction.  
So, these are available . The technologies are already available, what we need to do, we just 
need to go and read a little bit and also consult with the experts before designing your farm s. 
The second thing is that the like is the disease outbreak. So, the disease shrimp s have the 
tendency to swim to the surface of the production pond rather at the bottom, which might get 
consumed by the seagulls and thus, the seagulls then might subsequently excrete in a pond a 
few miles away and spreading the infection. So, it i s like kind  a way of spreading diseases. 
So, you understand like first suppose you have a diseased shrimp  or which because they have 
a tendency, they cannot breathe properly.  So, they go and they have because of the irritation that they are feeling, they go on the surface 
of the pond, and when they go to the surface of the pond or different type of predators, they 
captured them they literally cons ume them. O nce they consumed them  then they go say like 
miles and miles away and then they extend in a different pond . So, what will happen this is 
the way of spreading of infection from one pond  to the one farming system to the other farms 
to the other farm. So, this is how the disease outbreak is in generally,  it happens .  
Sudden shutting down of the shrimp farms  due to that disease outbreak it also not possible 
because of the socio economical impact like say like loss of employment, loss of high amount 
of economic like the loss of revenue and all. So, that is also sometimes not possible and even 
if you do so, it c omes with a lot of consequences . In general,  in India n context, the almost 
around 80 percent of the farm ed species  shrimp s are reared  from just two types of  species  
Penaeus  vannamei and Penaeus  monodon  and these monocultures  are extremely susceptible 
to infections and all.  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:03)  
 
Shrimps  can be affected by various infectious and non-infectious  diseases, infectious diseases 
like the white spot disea se, which is most common. O ther than that, they have this y ellow -
head disease, infectious  hepato pancreatic and lymphoid organ necrosis etc, they can have the 
bacteria l infections caused by this luminous vibriosis and etc.  
Fungal infestation,  protozoa n and the parasitic invasions li ke black g ill disease, surface 
fouling disease, microsporidiosis,  etc. So, if you want to know more about all these things, 
you can just simply Google it and you will get a more much better about better idea about what all are these diseases and what can b e the troubleshooting measure  that we should 
follow we should kind of follow in our system in our farm, s o, to get rid of this kind of 
disease or infection possible .  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:57)  
 
  
Non-infectious  diseases like soft -shell syndrome, because  some maybe because of the 
unavailability of specific type of elements like that shell are made up normally calcium 
magnesium compounds and also . There is a chance of decrementing these elements and it can 
cause different kinds of diseases, differ ent types  of diseases like soft -shell syndrome etc. 
Depletion of wild shrimp  stop, the fish stocks generally used for feeding the shrimp s have 
very high environmental value as the line near to the bottom of the marine food chain .  
Shrimp  farmers sometimes capture these young wild shrimps  for stocking their shrimp  pond 
and there by further depleting the local fish population. So, that is the reason why this 
depletion of wild shrimp  stocks are like we experienced or we kind of witnessed in all over 
the world right no w.  
Several criteria for stocking, i n conclusion, we can say like we discussed about several 
criteria for stalking during the shrimp  farming, we discuss about the rapid harvesting, how it 
can reduce the risks of bacterial contamination, which is very impor tant information for us , 
advantages of farming some commercial importance shrimp species has been discussed and 
what are the advantages and what can be the possible outcome that we can get out of 
culturing this particular type of shrimp species.  
What are the problems data that is associated with the shrimp  culture that also we discussed 
and we also discussed about the troubleshooting measures  that what  will be the 
troubleshooting me asures that we need to follow i n order to get rid of those problems. We 
know that the red or what are  the major takeaways from today’ s discussion from this lecture 
is first like the red or the  pink coloration of the post larva  it indicates the stress condition.  So, you need to think about the you need to find out the reason , you need to think about what 
is the cause behind what is and how to you have to think about the troubleshooting measure 
as soon as possible otherwise, it can cause drastic situation in your farm , it can be harvested 
either by draining the pond followed by  collecting the shrimp s using a bag net or by simply 
netting the shrimp  from the pond itself  using the bag shrimps and the net shrimps and all.  
Penaeus monodon  is the fastest growing shrimp s among all tested shrimp s for culture in 
Indian context than this  they can tolerate a wide range of salinity they whereas the Penaeus  
vannamei can tolerate t o low temperature very low temperature and can be found in the cold 
season as well. Pollution , disease outbreak , depletion on w ild stock  are some of the problems 
associated with the shrimp  culture and it can be definitely troubleshooted very easily once we 
know the reason behind it and once we can contact with the specific experts and who can 
give us an idea about like how to kind of solve these kinds of situations.  
And the specific in terms of pollut ions we already discussed that is the  very important 
solution for pollution outbreak is just go further recirculating aquaculture recirculating 
aquaculture systems. So, you can by this means you can easily reduce the amo unt of 
wastewater inclusion in the surface water bodies, how we can get rid of the groundwater 
recharge by your farm , just simply put a proper consolidation measure  for your what is it 
called those clay soil that you wi ll be using for your pond or you can properly design your 
embankment or the dy ke in proper way. So , the water will not seep and also from the other 
way like from outside also water cannot enter to your pond .  
So, to dilute your water or to introduce the predatory species or unwanted infectious diseases 
or in altogether. So, this is the problems that we this is the troubleshooting measure that we 
can think of . Disease outbre ak definitely you can go ahead, g et the p roper vaccination and 
proper culturing species  and try to go ahead with the maintain the pond in proper way like 
right from the beginning the lim ing to the end you can provide it with the proper type of 
chemicals. So , to have to reduce the amount of bacter ial load , harmful bacterial load from 
your system. The another important thing is the depletion of the wild stock and all this 
problems that we associated with the shrimp  culture we already discussed.  (Refer Slide Time:  25:32)  
 
So, these are the references as I told you like these are the references, you should really you 
can take a picture of it and then you can search it in Google. And I will really appreciate if 
you go and study these papers or this information ’s given in this particular year. So, it will 
enlarge your idea or more knowle dge about this particular field . So, that i s it for today for this 
lecture. So , we wi ll meet again in the for the next lecture. Thank you so much.  