Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  - 14 
Algal  Culture  
Hello  everyone.  My name  is Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick;  I am from  the agricultural  food 
engineering  department  of IIT Kharagpur . Welcome  to the course  advanced  aquaculture  
technology.  Today  we will be discussing  on the aqua  algal  system s from  the for the module -3 of 
farming  system.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:44)  
 
So, the topic  that I will be covering  are the application  of life food organisms,  larval  nutrition,  
selection  criteria  for live food sources,  algal  culture , parameters  affecting  the local  culture  and 
the micro algae  culture  methods.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  00:57)  
 
So, in general  live food organisms,  from  the name  itself,  we can understand  the food which  is 
still in a in living  conditions . So, in 1970s,  this marine  finfish and the shrimp  aquaculture , fry 
were  exclusively  exclusively  captured  from  the wild.  And then this when  complete  
domestication  of marine  and brackish  water  started , this hatchery  production  of fry became  a 
very common  practice.  This larviculture  techniques  it is it is in general  it various  from  the 
conventional  nursery  and the growout  ponds . But, and the techniques  that is normally  used is the 
husbandry  in husbandry  like animal  husbandry  feed strategies  and the microbial  controls . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:41)  
 So, in general  that the larva  that are they have  some  specific  criteria ; or I would  say like the 
specifications,  it is very small  and extremely  fragile  in nature.  They  are not physiologically  fully  
developed.  They  have  a very small  mouth  size and the underdeveloped  perception  organs  and the 
digest  digestive  systems.   
Therefore,  the food that we want  to supply  to this larva  has to be has to have the certain  qualities , 
which  will be good  enough  for them  to consume  it, and so to grow  like make  them  grow  to the 
for the stage  of development.  So larval  nutrition,  if I talk about  this full commercialization  of the 
farmed  fish and the shellfish,  it is depends  on the ample  availability  of the healthy  fry. And this 
larviculture  depends  on the proper  feeding  of this sensitive  larva’s  and all. So, thus larval  
nutrition  is very important;  it is one of the crucial  steps . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  02:32)  
 
So, what  are the, how this fish larva  like how this fish larva  was this most  of the fish larvas  that 
rely; how much  they rely on the food source . And what  are the criteria  based  on which  they we 
choose  the food source  for this larva  and all. So definitely,  it has to be at least partially  or easily  
digestible,  all the food that we are targeting.  It should  contain  the enzymes , it should  contain  the 
enzyme  systems  that allow  the autolysis  inside  the fish digestive  systems . It so it should  supply  
the all essential  nutrients  required  by the larval  predators . 
So, these  are the three  very essential  thing  is that is that has to be there  for them  to consume.  And 
however  the formulated  feed normally  what  we do in for other  like when  adult  adult  fishes  and adult  aquatic  species.  They are not, they cannot  meet  the requirements  because  they cannot  meet  
these  requirements  in general  for the larva  species ; for the specifically  when  they are in larval  
stage,  which  results  in a very poor growth  and the survival  of small  fish larva.  That is why 
people  started  thinking  about  the live food organisms . 
This live food organisms , they normally  they move.  So, because  of that the larva e can easily  
detect  it; because  they have  a very poor detection  mechanism  in their body ; because  they are in a 
very early  early  stage  of development.  So, this live food organisms  this as because  they are 
moving , they are keep  on moving . Because  of that, they can easily  identify  this larva e, they can 
easily  identify,  they can detect  it and they can have  it properly.  This continuous  movement  is 
also available  throughout  the water  column  which  also, which  is which  is like. In general , it is 
the one of the major  criteria  for the larva e species  to have  it in their food to have  this kind of 
behavior.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  04:29)  
 
So, selection  criteria  for the live food sources  in general  the cultural  point  of view,  definitely  it 
should  be available ; it should  have  a cost effective , it should  be cost effective  in nature.  The 
more  simple  production,  the more  easier  it is the versatility;  the uses of the user using  (versus ) 
the uses (versata)  versatility  of this particular  live food organisms  for different  kinds  of fishes , or 
different  other  types  of; different  type of larvas  for different  type of fishes . So, in larval  point  of view,  it has to be in physical  terms , it has to be pure,  it has to be acceptable  to the larvae , it has to 
be available  to the larval  species.  
Nutritional  point  of view , it has to be easily  digestible ; it should  have  a less energy  requirement ; 
it should  have  a less energy  requirement  for the production  of the same . However , it should  
provide  the ample  amount  of nutrients  to the our to our target  larval species.  So in general,  live 
food organisms  based  on the predator  species  it can vary,  say micro algae . Micro algae  is very 
famous  live food organisms  for bivalves,  penaeid  shrimp,  fishes  et-cetera  et-cetera . So for them,  
micro algae  is a very standard  like fishes  means  like mainly  the herbivorous  species.  
So for them,  this micro algae  are the major  live food sources,  which  they consume ; and they and 
or their larval  source  also. For the larva  also it is a very major  sources  of nutrients  for major  
nutrients.  Then  there  comes  this rotifer ; rotifers  are the ones which  is a microscopic  or semi -
microscopic  one. And there  is another  term for rotifer;  we call them  wheel animal  wheel . You 
know  wheel  animal  also, it is another  term for this rotifers.  So, rotifer s are a very famous  live 
food for the different  kinds  of crustaceans,  marine  fishes  et-cetera . 
Artemia  is another  type of live food,  which  also named  there  is a; there  is there  we also call them  
brine  shrimps.  Artemias  is a very small  it is actually  we call it brine  shrimps.  Actually  it is also 
kind of crustaceans  family , also it is called  brine  shrimp . So, this brine  shrimps  are very much  
famous , it is very much  useful  for the predator  species  like for the shrimps,  for the other  fishes  
and all. So, for them for those  for them,  for the when  they are in larval  stage,  it is a very famous ; 
it is a very sort of  food for them . And it is being  considered  in recent  days that this kind of live 
food organisms  are very much  beneficial  for higher  grow th of your target  species  and faster 
growth  of your larval  species , larval  stage  as to be specific.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  07:13)  
 
Then  there  comes  the algal  culture . In general,  it is algae  is it is one of the key components  for 
the marine  environment.  It contributes  significantly  to the global  primary  production , while  also 
playing  primary  production,  which  is the primary  food production  that that is what  I mean . And 
while  also playing  an important  role in uptake  or up taking  of dissolved  nutrients  from the 
surrounding  environment;  and because  of that, what  will happen ? The pollutant  load goes down.  
coastal  defense  from  the hazardous  wave,  so we can have  this sea grasses ; and all these  sea 
grass es are how they save the coast  coastal  regions,  coastal  mass.  
When  the sea comes , when  the sea wave  comes,  it will dissipate  the energy  of the wave.  And 
because  of that, it has a lower  impact  in the landmasses.  And so that is why it can it can it acts as 
a defense  system  for the coastal  regions.  Other  than that, it causes  the carbon  sequestration  as I 
already  mentioned,  that it consumes  a huge  amount  of carbon  dioxide  and they it also gives  back  
the oxygen . So, it is like a it is acting  as a carbon  dioxide,  carbon  sequestration;  some  major  
carbon  dioxide  sequestration  technique,  which  is which  we can naturally  available  and which  we 
can produce  artificially  also. 
We can I mean  which  can it can kind of utilize  this process  artificially  as well by human  
intervention , which  might  providing  a huge  amount  of a lot of seaweed,  a lot of sea grass,  a lot of 
mangrove  production , so these  are it. So, microalgae,  micro algae  in general,  the phytoplankton s 
which  form  the basis  of marine  in aquatic  food chain, we call them  micro algae.  So, they are in microscopic  in nature  in general;  so, that is why we call the micro algae . Primary  source  of 
omega  3 fatty acids  and it is considered  unlike  this micro algae . The difference  is like in case of 
micro algae , they are visible  in general.  
Obviously,  from  the name itself  we can understand  it is it is visible  in the naked  eye. So, majorly  
the seaweeds  are seaweeds  are considered  under  this category.  So, it has a critical  habitat  
structuring  species  in the coastal  ecosystems,  which  actually  does this major,  this major  job of 
coastal  defense  in from  the hazardous  waves  and will dissipate  the wave  energy.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  09:33)  
 
The parameters  which  can affect  the algal  culture  is the nutrient  quantity  and the quality,  
turbulence,  the salinity,  light, the pH, the temperature.  So, these  are the ones these  are the 
different  regulating  parameters  which  can affect s the algal  growth ; definitely  depending  upon  the 
culture  species,  what  type of algae  it is and where  they normally  dwell,  and what  were  based  on 
their dwelling  nature , based  on their choose  of habitat.  And this this this particular  parameters  
has to be maintained  when  we try to grow  it artificially ; we try to grow  it by human  intervention.  
Several  micro algae  species  are grown  commerc ially for the following  uses. It can give us a high 
value  chemicals  like carotenoids,  fatty acid,  nutraceuticals  Cosmo,  cosmeceuticals,  animal  feed 
for the personal  care products  and all like this comes  cosmeceuticals  and all. This animal  feed is 
for the husbandries  and all, we can utilize  it. Wastewater  treatment  definitely  as I mentioned,  it 
can consume  a huge  amount  of nutrient  from  the wastewater ; because  of that that pollutant  load goes down.  It can use as a soil conditioner  for aqua  agriculture ; and believe  me, this is one of the 
major  requirement . 
This is one of the major  how to say, it is it is nowadays  people  are using  all over the world  this 
seaweed  extract  for agriculture,  for a royal  for soil replenishment.  So, it can we can utilize  this 
seawater  extract  sea, sorry,  the seaweed  extracts  for agriculture  purpose,  the potential  use of the 
bioactive  compounds  like antibi otics,  anti cancer,  drugs  et-cetera  et-cetera  is also possible  from  
this seaweeds . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:18)  
 
In general , the micro algae  they are the phytoplanktons  formed  from  the base of, which  is like 
from  the base of the food chain  in mariculture.  The micro algae , it is actually  it is indispensable , 
and as it is a food source  for all the growth  stages . So, we have  to have  this micro algae  in the 
system  for the bivalve  mollusc,  for the larval  stages  of some  crustacean  species  for very early  
growth  stage  of some  fish species  as well; and obviously , for the herbivorous  and fishes  as well.  
In general,  how it works?  This food chain  algae,  then zooplankton,  like rotifers,  this copepods,  
brine  shrimp;  or these  brain  shrimps  or this Artemia . 
Then, this larval  or early  juvenile  stage  of the crustaceans  and fish, so that is how it works.  In 
general,  the algae  which  grown  in the larval  tank,  stabilized  should  have  providing  the nutrition  
to the larvae ; it helps  in microbial  control,  it stabil izes the water  quality  as well.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  12:18)  
 
So, the commercial  scale  microalgae  culture  methods  in general , we have  same  as like we 
discussed  extensive  aquaculture , extensive , intensive  and semi -intensive  or intensive  ones.  It is 
like the same  way. In case of commercial  stage  microalgae  culture  systems  also varies  like these  
three  methods;  first is extensive.  In extensive  culture  methods,  very,  we do not actually  they have  
a very very minimal  human  intervention.  In general , they almost  no intervention  at all in case 
extensive  micro algae  culture  system . 
There can be done  in extensive  very large  area like almost  can up to, can go up, can goes up, can 
go up to 250 hectare . So, like multiply  with 10, you can easily  identify  the amount  of size in 
square  meter.  So, then you supplied  within  in a very low cell density  of around  0.5 to 0.1 to 0.5 
gram  per liter of dry weight.  Ponds  are shallow  with a depth  of 30 to 50 centimeter  and the 
species  cultures  mainly , not mainly  this is one of the example  of this Dunaliella  Salina.  So, this is 
one of the example  of the species  that can be culture ; it is actually  kind of a micro algae  that can 
survive  in the extreme  enviro nment  as well this D Salina.  
So, they can be utilized  for the production  of beta-Carotenoids ; and it can it can grow  in a very 
high salinity  25 to 35 percent  30 percent  is weight  by volume  of sodium  chloride  and the high 
temperature  up to 30 to 40 degree  Celsius  it can easily  grow ; so this can this kind of species . So, 
only control  operator  have  this system  is like the salinity , which  can be controlled  by adding  
seawater . If you see that the salinity  of this farm is going  down ; you can simply  open  the sluice  gate. And whenever  the high tides  flow condition  is maintaine d, the canal  should  be designed,  
canal  should  be developed . 
And through  this canal  system  and through  this sluice  gate,  you can easily  control  the flow of sea 
water , influence  of the sea water  or inflow  of seawater  in your farm. Nutrient  concentration  is 
adjusted  by depending  on the requirement  of the microalgae,  you can supply  it additionally  the 
nutrients  nutrients  to the system.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:42)  
 
Then , there  comes  the semi -intensive  culture . So, we already  know  what  is the semi -intensive  
culture;  it means  there  needs  some  human  intervention . So, it has a less, it requires,  it require  like 
in general  it requires  less land area compared  to the extensive  aquaculture , extensive  this algae  
culture.  Better  mixing  of culture  can be done  which  can improve  the control  of the cultural  
condition.  See in this particular  case, if you see this is a particular  raceway  what  I have  designed , 
where  you see this harvest  the place  where  we can provide  the feed 0.2 meter  per second  of flow 
is maintained.  
The pond  depth  or the time depth  is around  0.03 meter  with a. You can see the size, the width  
length  ratio is given  1 to 10. Like if it is 1 say 10 meter  is the length  of the; 10 meter  is the width  
of the tank, so 100 meter  should  be the length  of the tank. So, that is how it is to be designed.  
Better  mixing  of cultures  it improved  the control  of culture  conditions,  higher  cell densities  up to 
1 gram  per liter of dry weight  can it is it is possible  in this kind of case.  The raceway  ponds  are the main  culture  systems  with the productivity  of up to 30 gram  per square  meter  per day of dry 
weight . 
So, in general , so this is the dry weight;  this 30 gram  is the dry weight  that I am talking  about.  
So, pond  size can go up to 1 hectare  with 30 centimeter  of depth.  So, that pond  depth  it should  be 
it is wrong  actually ; it should  not be 0.03, it should  be 0.3 meter.  So, just remind  this and this is 
now the 0.3. This is 0.3 meter,  it is like 30 centimeter , not the 3 centimeter.  The factors  to be 
considered  while  designing  the optimally  sized  ponds;  the optimal  pond  depth  around  for 
consider ing the light penetration , it has to be 20 to 30 centimeter.  
The mixing  velocity , minimum  flow rate has to be 10 centimeter  per second  and optimal  is like 
better  to go ahead  with the 30 centimeter  per second.  The cell density  must  be controlled  to 
minimize  the shelf -shedding  shading of by the cell. What  does that mean ? If you have  very high 
alkyl  bloom  in your system  in your in your culture.  What  will happen ? Because  of this algal  
bloom,  so, it will give us shading  effect  to the species  that is dwelling  in the bottom  or the in the 
column  region.  
So, for them  they will not be supplied  with the enough  amount  of sunlight.  So, proper  mixing  
density  has to be mixing  velocity  has to be mentioned  maintained  and also cell density  has to be 
controlled  based  on that manner;  it cannot  go, we cannot  go ahead  with the very intensive  
production.   
So, this is how semi -intensive  culture  look like. And how in general  when  we go for culturing  for 
a very huge  amount  in a when  we have ; we do not have  any land issues . We can procure  land 
and or we can lease  it, or we can say rent it and land; and we can have  our culture  of microalgae,  
so we can go ahead with these  kind of systems.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  17:58)  
 
Last but not the least is the intensive  culture.  From  the name  itself  you understood  we are we 
normally  provide  in case of intensive  culture  a very well optimal  situations , optimal  conditions  
from  each sense,  like based  on the light,  based  on the amount of carbon  dioxide  that you are 
supplying;  I mean  based  on the nutrient  that is available  in the system;  so everything  has to be 
optimal.  And because  of that, because  of this optimal  environmental  conditions  or the 
environmental  consideration  like (situ) the parameters  that you are providing  to the system , it can 
grow  very intensively . 
It can grow  the the amount  of algae  that is present  there  can grow  very at a very high rate and the 
production  rate is. This kind of systems  are actually  nowadays  used for the biofuel  production  
and all. So, we simply  extract  the lipid and then we use it for the bio fuel production  and all. So, 
that is a very standard  methods  of the recent  days studies  based  where  people  are working  on this 
green  fuels  and all; so they go for this intensive  culture  of microalgae . It can be grown  under  a 
highly  controlled  optimum  conditions  that as I already  told, and in closed  photo -bioreactors.  
These kind of systems  are called  photo -bioreactor,  where  because  of the artificial  light that we 
are providing;  that is why we call it photo -bioreactors.  Obviously,  it is a bioreactor  where  will be 
culturing  some  biological  living  organisms.  It can have  a high cell density  up to 10 gram  per liter 
of, per 10 gram  per liter in on the basis  of dry weight  it can go, so which  is like very high.  So, the culture  systems  this kind of culture  systems  can be of different  type; big back  systems , tubular  
photo -bioreactors , flat panel,  hetero trophic cultures  and all. 
So, big back  system  is look like this. You see the culture  if you see the picture  figure  there.  So, 
the culture  medium  through  the nutrient  dose permit  comes  to the these  big bags or this particular  
transparent  plastic  bags, or it can be made  up other  materials  as well.  So, where  the light sources  
because  of the light source,  it penetrates  till inside  the system , and you can grow  the easily  you 
can grow  the algae  algae  there . At the end if you at the end when  it goes, when  it starts  settled , 
you can easily  take it out from  the this bottom  ball part for the exit system ; the microbial  biomass  
exit system ; so that is how it works  in case of big back  systems.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:43)  
 
And these  are some  of the very advanced  techniques . So, these  are the techniques  which  
nowadays  people  are using  all over the world , like it is not limited  to this only these  three  type of 
structure ; it can be any structure  based  on a proper  scientific  design.  See the first one. If you see 
this helical  tubes,  those  tubes  are nothing  but they are utilized  for the culture  of algae.  There  are 
algaes  growing  there  inside  this glass  tubes . So, you will see the this is highly  optimal  situation  is 
provided  there . Because  of that, there  is a huge  amount  of, there  is a the rate of production  of 
algae  is very high in this kind of system . 
And if you see the tanks  through  the pump , the flow is provided , flow of nutrient  media.  Algae  is 
grown  in the in this helical  tubes  and, so this is how it works.  So, if the next time this multi  tubular  airlift  photo -bioreactor  if you see. So, the the in the probes  and through  the mixed  gash is 
come  and go inside  from  the bottom ; and the gash which  is coming  out of the system.  So, this 
actually  provides  the carbon  dioxide  or the ample  amount  to for them  to grow.  Normally , we mix 
it with other  gaseous  also or it is better  to go ahead  with the flue gases  and all. 
It can feed the it can fit those  flue gases  from  the industrial  region.  Now adays,  these  are used this 
kind of photo -bioreactors , and multi  tubular;  early  photo -bioreactors  are even  used in industries  
for carbon  dioxide  sequestration.  So, they are having  this multiple  layer  of stacks  of photo -
bioreactors  and there  it is fridge  like structure . We have  this fridge  or incubator  like structures , 
where  we have this multiple  sheets  of these  photo -bioreactors.  And the flue gases  industrial  flue 
gases  where  which  carbon  dioxide  rich or the greenhouse  rich gases  are actually  supplied  
through  it. 
So, because  of this supply  of this carbon  dioxide  rich gaseous , they consume  the carbon  dioxide ; 
they even  they utilize  it. And for the growing  of the biomass , they convert  it into the biomass . 
And by this way we can get rid of the global  gas greenhouse  gases  like carbon  dioxide  and all. 
So, that is actually  a very standard  practice ; not a standard  practice . it is a very cutting  edge  
technology.  People  are using  it. I know  a couple  of startups  all over the world,  they are working  
on it. And they it will be the, it is actually  the future ; it is actually  I am telling  you this 
technologies  that I am discussing  are the future  of human  civilizations.  
People  will be using  it a lot in their daily  purposes  in different  places.  And not only that this algal  
biomass  that you are actually  we are actually  harvesting  out of these  reactors , can be utilized  for 
the production  of the this different  biofuels  and all. This biofuels  or the bio diesels  are very clean  
clean  energy  source.  These  are actually  been  used even  to run a car nowadays.  So, in Germany,  
people  in Germany,  this technology  are now practiced  in different  places , especially , in Munich  
and Berlin ; so, they are working  on it. 
So, where  they have  utilized  this kind of technologies  for even  running  a small, automated  small  
vehicles.  So, in futur e there  is a high chances  in this there  will be in near future  will be utilizing  
this different  type of biofuels  for the for transportation  purpose s. So, this other  than that, there  is 
another  type of flat panel  photo -bioreactor;  you can see there  is like air inlet and the water  inlet. 
And actually  there  is the medium  inlet and I mean  like the nutrition  this nutrient  medium  that we 
normally  supply  there. And in this to this two parallel  units  in between  them,  maybe  we put we can put the light; or in it 
is like a sandwich  like structure . We can put the LED  light, we can provide  LED  panel , we can 
provide  this LED  panels  have ; we can optimize  it in such a way there  is a chance  the exact  photo  
exact  luminescence , or exact  the wavelength  of light that is required  for the chlorophyll . For that 
can be utilized  by the chlorophyll  of those  chlorophylls  of those  those  micro algae;  they can 
utilize  it. And because  of the exact  amount  of luminescence  that we are providing,  exact  amount  
of wavelength  of light that we are providing ; they can utilize  it in optimal  way.  
And they can they can convert  it to the biomass  in a very speedy  manner.  So, that is how the 
scientists  are working  on nowadays  in different  sector,  in this kind of sectors,  how they are 
utilizing  it. And these  are the advanced  technologies  that I was always  discussing  you in this 
lecture  series,  and maybe  I will discuss  more  in that in later lectures  as well,  like how these  
advanced  technologies  are changing  the world  and the human , the future  of human  civilizations.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:59)  
 
So in conclusion,  this micro algae  it play actually  a major  critical  role in the larval  nutrition  of 
important  marine  aquaculture  species.  It is also this algae  culture , this algal  culture  is done  in a 
very small  scale ; but it has a tremendous  potential  to grow  high value  chemicals  and compounds  
for various  benefits.  And in near future,  it can simply  be the one of the one of the fastest  growing  
sector  in the in the in terms  of this aquaculture  practice . I am telling  you this microalgae , 
macroalgae  is having  in this book  have  a very high impact  on the human  civilizations.  And people  who will be working  on this more  and more  often  than now, because  these  seaweeds  
I told you they seaweeds  and all, this has a huge  impact.  It has a lot of byproducts  that we can 
recover  out of it. But we are not utilizing  it at this full stage.  Forget  about  the full fledged , like 
not even  like percentage  is a very small  fraction  of it is utilizing  in all over the world . There  is 
enormous  possibility  of utilizing  the seaweeds.  Second  thing  is this microalgae.  Micro algae  has 
an enormous  amount  of benefits.  So this microalgae  is, it is like a liquid  gold. So, if you can use 
it properly , if you can produc e if you can produce  it in a very optimum  condition.  
If you sustainably  produce  it and scientifically  form  it, there  is a high chance  you will get a very 
high amount  of economic  return  out of it and which  you can utilize  for your economic  benefit ; 
and also for the purpose  of the development  of your country's  GDP.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  27:41)  
  
So, the takeaway  messages  from  this lecture  is the culture  of algae  is definitely  improves  the 
primary  production  as well as the various  benefits  of the marine ecosystem.  This micro algae  
forms  the basis  of the food chain  for all the marine  aquatic  organisms  and is this microalgae or 
macro algae  or the seaweeds  are highly  beneficial  to the habitat  and to the system  in a general  in a 
in a whole.  These  are the references  that I have  taken  the information  from ; so you may consider  
this references  too. 
You can pause  the video  and you can see this refer  and look into these  references  for, in order  to 
have  more  idea more  information  about  the discussions  that we just had. Thank  you so much.  Let 
us meet  for wait for the next lecture . 