Advanced Agriculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick   
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture - 16  
Topic – Introduction to Freshwater Prawn Culture  
Welcome everyone. My name is Gourav Dhar Bhowmick, I am from the Agriculture  and 
Food Engineering  Department of IIT, Kharagpur . So,  welcome to this NPTE L online 
certification course on A dvanced Agriculture Technology.  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:41)  
 
Today , we wi ll start the module 4 on technology of Crustacea farming on the lecture 1 of 
introd uction to the freshwater prawn culture.  (Refer Slide Time:  0:49)  
 
The topics that I will be covered is the introduction to the crustacean , general characteristics 
of the  freshwater prawn culture , diseases and the control measures in case of prawn culture . 
(Refer Slide Time:  1:00)  
 
So, in general the crustaceans are a part of phylum Arthropods . So, in general the  species  like 
crabs, prawns, lobsters, barnacles, crayfish, shrimp,  beach fleas , krill and woodlice  are the 
ones which are considered under this category that is crustacean  category. T hese are the one 
which we normally people like we farm and we use it for different purposes. They are 
actually the most valuable and the most highly credit seafood commodity out of all the 
available market that is like there  in the Aquaculture  Indus try. It  contributes to around 8 
percent  of total fish supply worldwide, almost 14.5 million tonnes per year.  The world crustacean culture it involves almost 17.6 percent as Marine and 29.4 percent  is 
freshwater production. In Asia itself, actually the China and Thailand specifically, they ar e 
the major producers almost 75 percent  of the crustaceans in the world. Surprisingly, you will  
be astonished  to know that these crustaceans  are responsible for 94 percentage of the 
estimated increase in the carbon emissions f rom fishery sector . So, you know it has this good 
part as well as like a constant  process  there . So, the pros part  is like it i s a major source of 
seafood supply for the most of the part of the world.  
However, it comes with a huge amount of disadvantage of becoming the major carbon 
producer, carbon producer , carbon emitter in the world . So, that i s why we that I mean, like 
the farming process itself . So,  that i s why we need to adhere to or we need to start thinking 
about actually the technologies are alre ady available by the researchers by the scientists we 
need to go and ask them  to se arch for the available optimal on design of the farm , so, that is  
carbon emissions can be minimized .  
(Refer Slide Time:  3:09)  
 
They have actually some direct and indirect benefits on the human health like in terms of 
aesthetic value, this hermit crab, this m antis banana shrimps, this blue lobster s, this  atyid  
shrimps you see the atyid shrimps one example of how it looks like . So, they are often used 
for the aquatic exhibition or they lose they are very rare and they look s very nice actually . So, 
that they look very nice , so, that i s why they put it we put it in the aquarium and marine 
aquarium and like fo r aquatic aesthetic enhance ment.  Commercial wise the crabs, shrimps and lobsters they have the highest commercial value 
among all other crustaceans . They are the very rich source of protein and comparatively 
much costlier than other sources of animal protein. However, this is like very much product 
or products  in this particular sector in aquatic sectors.  Giant tiger  prone and the Pacific white  
shrimps are among the most cultivated shrimp species it accounts for almost 80 percent  of the 
total cultivat ed shrimp species , giant tiger prawn and the Pacific white  shrimps .  
(Refer Slide Time:  4:19)  
 
So, in biomedical value, the shells of crustaceans li ke the crabs they are used for t reating the 
inflammatory disease like inflammatory bowel disease s and all . So,  it has a medicin al 
purposes also medicinal utilization as well. It used as a bio indicators , what do  I mean by the 
bioindicators , it can indicate the environmental degradation. If the water is polluted or not 
that we can easily identify if we go for culturing the ghost  shrimps . So,  scientific name is 
Palaemo netes argentines , so we this Palaemonetes argentines  they also known as ghost  
shrimp or  the feeder shrimps  is an indicator of t he environmental pollution or the amount of 
pollutants present in the  freshwater niches. S o, that i s a that is what we call it bioindicators . 
Geological point of view Ostracods or  the seeds shrimp , so they are the most common 
arthropods found in the fossil record s. So,  based on that also we can have an idea about the 
evolutionary point of view like evolutionary point of view how like in terms of it i s a big of a 
thing for the scientists who are working with the fossils .  
So, other uses , the mole crab or the sand flea  are used for bait in game fishing , I think what is 
game fishing or so, this is game f ishing is like you will have a competition of games . So, it is like very famous in different parts and parts of world where people go for recreational 
fishing .  
So, recreational fishing is like one when there is like already cultural species are avai lable 
you go for fishing there and the amount of fees that you can harvest based on that you will be 
given a prize or something like this is a game fishing is a kind of recreational activities there 
all over the world in different places you will find this  kind of culture . So, there as a bait, we 
use this sand flea  or this small crab so this is the crustaceans that we normally use as a bait 
for the other fish species  to collect for the game fishing, sports fishing also we call it .  
(Refer Slide Time:  6:32)  
 
What are the general characteristics of crustaceans they have very high hard skin, although 
we call it shells because of the calcium carbonate deposits in the cuticle region . So, because 
of that the calcium carbonate layer  it says that hard in  structure. I t either the y breathe  through 
their gills or through the entire surface of the body based on the type of species that we are 
culturing.  Crustaceans they excrete  through the antenna or the maxilla gland , they have an 
open circulatory system an d the their bodies are divided into mainly the three segments . First, 
the head or the c ephalon, the thorax and or like the neck part and the abdomen or  the pleon 
part.  (Refer Slide Time:  7:17)  
 
So, freshwater prawn culture , the practice of freshwater prawn  culture is thriving because it is 
more useful than catching them from the rivers, canals  like estuaries  or the streams because it 
is sometimes nowadays it i s started depleting even in the natural resources and because of 
that the freshwater prawn cul ture is becoming very big of industry and all over the world . So, 
it grows very fast actually on within 6 months it comes to its natural stage or the marketable 
size of 150 to 180 millimeter and around 1.4 million hectare s of Indian estuaries and 
black wate rs are suitable for prawn farming but it is not being utilized  fully .  
So, there are ample amount of opportunities with live with this particular sector, the 
freshwater prawn culture in Indian scenario and definitely there is a possibility of designing 
proper farm , so, that we can get maximum benefit as well in the economic benefit as well 
considering the environment al benign. Macrobrachium r osenberg ii or the scampi is the very 
most preferred commercial species available in India and not only India, like in I ndia and 
Southeastern Asia also.   
It is a giant freshwater prawn we call it so they are the scampi  hatcheries are the one  which is 
very famous and we in India also we have different organizations who are working on it and 
they have developed different methods and they have developed a very nice design on the 
hatchery farms , which are optimal in nature which consider all the environmental benefits, 
which was considered all the economic benefits and that is already available .  
So, it just need to be popularized right now, so far to have a more amount of farms in future 
to have in India . So,  to provide the ample amount of shrimp into all the market that is available in India not only in India, but also it can start exporting to the outside India , so, 
because there is a huge marke t lying  outside India, especially in Europe region .  
(Refer Slide Time:  9:30)  
 
So, the size of this Macrobrachium rosenberg ii or this can be varies from 150 to 250 
millimeter , maximum size can be 320 millimeter, which is really huge. T hey are usually  
found in , we can find them in extremely target conditions and they are also known as called 
Golda chingri  or Mocha  chingri in Indi a.  
(Refer Slide Time:  9:52)  
 
If you see the lifecycle, so in general they are incubated , the eggs are incubated for 21 to 25  
days by the female they carry, then these zoea stage where it i s like 5 to 12 instars  in like 20 to 40 days  they have different stages of develop ment. Then there come this post -larva the 
juvenile stage where from this juvenile to adult it will take 1 20 to 210 days for them to 
mature  come to the  marketable size, which is like all together it i s like if you calcu late like 
altogether it does no t take more than 180 days which was like around 6 months of time .  
(Refer Slide Time:  10:35)  
 
So, the major producers of the Macrobrachium rosenberg ii are if you can see, it i s like China , 
Taiwan, the one which is like measuring the province of China , Bangladesh, Ecuador, India, 
Brazil, Malaysia and Thailand are the ones who are leading in this sector.  
(Refer Slide Time:  10:52)  
 The states in freshwater prawn culture, when we try to design a freshwater prawn culture or 
the hatcheries we need to think about certain param eters, which are very important . So, first 
of all, look to start with the site selection, climatic condition  is very important or like it i s one 
of the major considerat ion for the site selection , tropical or subtropical climate is that most 
most suitable for long cultural period .  
Warm climate suitable for short culture period like if you go ahead with the temperate region 
and further in the polar regions,  it has to be very, you have to be very precise that’s sort of 
standard site for the production of the freshwater prawn  and on but you can do it there are 
possibility and there are people doing it right now .  
So, they are trying to mimic this environmental  condition in a controlled environment in a 
controlled atmosphere in greenhouse and all. T opography the flat and the gently sloped land 
is needed , soil quality the recommended is th e sandy loam soil containing 60 percent  of the 
sand and 40 of the silt with  85 percent of water retention capacity at least. T he clay  content 
cannot be more than 60 percent,  the soil with the acid sulfate should be avoided . so, to have a 
harmful impact on your product.  
(Refer Slide Time:  12:20)  
 
Water  quality definitely unpolluted water, w hat does that mean like it should not have any 
kind of pollutions with it can be like all the organic species it can be inorganic species, it can 
be metal contamination, it can be thermal pollution, it can be radioact ive pollution, you need 
to think about all this pollutants in your system, you have to take the water first check it in the 
water quality lab and check that all the parameters are well within the content well within the limit or not. If it is not, then you  have to treat  that water before going for or you have to go 
for the freshwater exchange , it can be sea water , it can be brackish water exchange . So,  to 
have a proper quality maintained in your farm .  
So, the pH has to be well within 7 to 8.5 , the temperat ure 18 to 34 degrees Celsius , dissolved  
oxygen  3 to 7 ppm, hardness of around 50 to 1 00 milligram per liter of calcium carbonate, so, 
that has to be maintained. It i s just to have a proper quality of water for the supplier for the 
production of your crustacea  or target , whatever the target like  prawn you have .  
So, the pond  construction , size and depth area should be around 1 to 5 hectare to have a 
maximum  economic benefit actually. Squa re farms are more economical in terms of easy to 
knitting  and all . Rectangular pumps are more appropriate for harvesting in that sense  and 
capacity should hold at least 1. 5 to 2 meters  of water inside .  
(Refer Slide Time:  14:01)  
 
And the dy ke, the drainage point on the dyke  that you have to maintain the bottom needs to 
be sloped towards the dyke  and mixing of the outlet water and the incoming water should be 
prevented , what does that mean , the dyke has to be maintained size a s the end so the slope 
when it ends , so, there wil l be like outline, outward pipe from where the drainage water will 
go out outlet water . So,  this outlet water has not cannot be in touch with incoming water 
which is coming from the other side . It has to be coming from the other , you have to design it 
accordingly.  
Water supply , 15 days after the lim ing so why do I only need liming ? Liming is a 
phenomenon, liming is the  method that we normally use to get  rid of to prepare the land. It i s very important it has a drastic influence in the pond ecosystem . So,  I am not going into 
details w hat is the purpose and  all because I can take a full lecture on this lining material , the 
usefulness of lining measuring before pond construction and even after the pond also, we 
provided some time, but what are the reason beh ind it , you can better search for it in Google 
and what is the requirement of l iming and what is the need of lim ing in the pond development 
the pond  and all.  
The pond  should be filled slowly to facilitate the oxygenation . So, slowly you have to f ill so, 
that they will get much time to for diffused  oxygen from the air to come in contact with water 
and it will enhance the oxygenation or the oxygen content , a dissolved  oxygen content in the 
water. Prefer red source is obviously the groundwater and the clean canal water, incoming 
water should  be filtered using the 300 to 100-micron  mesh fabrics  to remove all the unwanted 
predators  and all .  
The drainage system you have to design it should facilitate the effective removal of all the 
water and the subsequent drying  on the pond. Mainly, the dr ainage system should be done, 
drainage shou ld be done by gravity or by pump s preferably via a monk  structure or a sluice 
gate structure . So,  monk  is a construction term which we use in the like I wi ll discuss with 
you in details  in the later lecture how to desig n a sluice gate for tide fed  farms and all . The 
outlet water must be checked to avoid the fish escape . So,  you can put a ne t mat erial which 
has the mere size lower than the minimum size of the fish that is dwelling in your  farm .  
(Refer Slide Time:  16:40)  
 This is a standard structure on the production cycle of Macrobrachium rosenberg ii if you  see. 
It starts from the berried females  which obtained from the captive brood stocks . Brood stock  
you see from them the larva obtained from the egg-carrying  berried, you see the first is  the 
broodstock , from the broodstock we have these berried females  from these berried females 
they have they produce this larva , they have these eggs  they produced and egg carrying 
females they provide the egg, the egg is hatched  and the la rva is provided . Lar va is obtain,  
this larva i s reared  in 11 larval stage from to metamorphosis to the post -larval situation for it 
will take 16 to 35 days in a hatchery tank.  
From there it comes to the recycling systems with the flow through other recycling systems 
and it comes to the post larval pond and this post larval pond to the nursery  tank or the 
earthen nursery for the further growth of the juvenile stage and then from then they convert it 
they shipped it to the grower from pond where they with time they will become mature and 
they will they are har vested either in a sold in live fish on ice or frozen con dition . So, that i s 
the prod uction cycle of Macrobrachium r osenberg ii it looks like . The broodstock can be 
collected from the prawn that is harvested or from the capture fisheries also from the wild 
habitat.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:06)  
 
The production systems of fertilization so the broodstock it i s actually the female prawn 
which found in the tropical freshwater where the adult prawns are present in all around the 
year. So, in general, we use this broodstock obtained from this capture fisheries or grow -out 
pond  for the external fertilization process.  The fertilized egg subsequently get attached to the hairs of the pleopods  of this females as 
you can see from the figure  how it looks like until the eggs hatch . So, up to 4000 e ggs can be 
carried by each these berried females  for about 4 months. Can you imagine like and then 
these eggs  are orange in general , so until the 2, 3 days before hatching, at the end, they will 
almost if you see the color  change in the right side if it is like a small  orang ish in color and 
the left side is grayish -black . So, that means it is about to hatch .  
So, larval development aft er the it is hatched, so it i s called the zoea stage , so then the zoea 
stage in the free swimming zoea  is produced after the hatching of egg. The zoea  grows from 
like 2 millimeter in the first stage  to almost 8 millimeter at the end of the metamorphosis.  
(Refer Slide Time:  19:25)  
 
 What is their natural food? What is their food ? In general , they go for the fresh fish, broken 
rice, vegetables, tapioca root , agriculture, animal husbandry byproducts, f or enhanced growth 
rates and the quality . The feed is provided in pellet form and must stay intact in underwater 
for a few hours until consumed. Recently, the  trend  has changed also, rec ently people are as 
we discussed in earlier lecture series, that we go for live feed as well . So,  now it is even 
artemi a are use, this a rtemia or this b rian shrimps  are used for the content consumption as 
well.  
So, there is actually used there we culture this artemias and they are being used as a feed for 
the larval feed as well . The harvesting is done either partially or completely as giant prawns 
do not grow at a uniform rate . So, we harvest it only the one which is already mature enough 
and we leave it back the other we bycatch  our, you can call it bycatch like the one which is 
not mature we just leave it back to the system so that will grow and once they will grow in 
the mature s tage then only we wi ll take it out of the pond or the tank or the target  production 
farm .  
So, the larger prawns  are actually separated during the partial harvesting using the special 
nets of mesh  size of around 3.8 to 5 centimeter whereas 1.8 centimeter mesh size nets  are 
used to separate the smaller prawns . So,  concrete harvesting options prawns can be done by 
draining the pond . So, once that it i s complete natural stages major stages al ready attained by 
all the shrimp s. So, you completely drain the pond and you collect all the shrimps. T o avoid 
the overheating of the water draining is usually done early in the morning . So,  we drain the 
water , we go for the freshwater exchange in the early in the morning .  
So, at that time th e overheating problem is not there especially in the summer season 
especially we go for this tropical and subtropical region there is a chance of overheating 
because of the like sunlight maximum  amount of sunlight present in this  thing . So, the 
prawns are provided with the fresh oxygenated water where they are near to the outlet and 
this freshwater prawns  should have to be handled carefully during the harvesting otherwise 
they can  turn mushy . So,  if prawns are  sold live they can be transported  at 20 to 2 2 degrees 
Celsius aerated water .  (Refer Slide Time:  22:03)  
 
Sometimes if it i s like frozen or a condition we can have a proper ice chambers what is it 
called this cold storage vans and all.  They should be killed in a mixture of ice and water at 0 
degrees Celsius followed by washing in chlorinated tap water . They are not if they a re not 
going to be sold live, why they should be they should be killed in nature of ice and water is 
essential it is like it is a kind of a shock, hyperthermia shock .  
So, this hypothe rmia shocks are needed for kind a  less cruel way of killing them and it can 
make them in intact  condition almos t intact conditions before they ha ve been consumed by 
human consumption or maybe for any other reasons. Prawns  must be kept for more  than 3 
days on ice if they are going to be sold fresh. And the prawns  if needed, if intended to be sold 
frozen should be frozen quickly at 20  Celsius at minus 10 degrees Celsius followed by 
storage up to minus 20 degrees or below .  (Refer Slide Time:  23:05 ) 
 
For its maximum to retain its authenticity the maximum that we normally like test and all. So, 
diseases and what are the diseases that can normally be happen in case of fresh water prawn  
on Macrobrachium rosenberg ii and what are the troubleshootin g measure that we can attain 
that we can obtain .  
So, this is the chart it is like it i s a it is given by it is taken from the FAO  standard procedures 
that is kind of experienced or like all over the world, people are using it this chart, all over the 
world this particular, see, I a m giving you some one example the MMV,  macrobrachium 
muscle virus,  so which is like agent is like Parvo like virus, the type of the living organism is 
virus and the syndrome is infected tissue becomes opaque and with progress ive necrosis and 
affects the juveniles as well .  
So, productive measure is  improve  the husbandry , improve husbandry means try to improve 
the farming practices and all, so or in try to get them in a separate them into  quarantine pond  
and do some , separate the quarantine pond  and try to improve th e quality of the husbandry 
that i s the basic thing that you can do . In case of say like bacterial necrosis , in case of 
bacterial ne crosis like Pseudomonas or leucothrix , so, they are the bacterial in nature  they are 
in like living organism, which are responsible for that is bacteria which is similar to the black 
spot but only affects the larva, especially stages 4 and 5.  
In that case, not only animal husbandry will fulfill the situation but also you have to  supply it 
with some chemical , supply with some pharmaceuticals like the nifurpurinol  etc. So, these are 
the one penicillin streptomycin and also these are the one which will help them to get rid of it is like a kin d of medicine for them to  or the  measures  there  are controlled measures  that we 
can take while they will be affecte d by this particular disease, I a m not going to details for 
each and every diseases, it i s actually available in online you can definitely search for a data 
and have a better idea ab out what type of agent and what type of syndromes are actually 
present and which can cause that specific type of disease and what are the measures that can 
be taken .  
So, once you will do the farming practices, you have to have this chart ready with you , we 
have to have this chart or table ready with you . So, once you will see those s yndromes which 
are written here, if you see those syndromes in your f arming species or farming whatever I 
will say like the target species, what you need to do , you just firs t thing you just go ahead 
with the initial measures  go for improve  husbandry or you go for an definitely parallel you go 
and talk to the experts and talk to the veterinary expert who knows more in details about 
these diseases, how the syndromes are actuall y caused by that particular disease or other. 
Then they will suggest you the measure  that you need to take the amount of the water the 
chemicals that you need to provide them so to get rid of that particular type of 
microorganisms . So, that is the way that  we need to go ahead .  
(Refer Slide Time:  26:29)  
 
So, there are other di seases as well, a lot of them I a m not going into details like it can be the 
type, you can see that the type of microorganism responsible for it can vary a lot, it can be 
virus, viral, it can be bacterial, it can be fungal, it can be protozoan and there are some 
unknown organisms which are also involved with like, idiopathic  muscle  necrosis, it i s a 
environmental decisions called , why the type of  species is still unknown, why  still under process, there are different how to say suggestions or different expressions by the researcher s 
and they simply they say like  simply we should go for th e hatchery disinfection and dietary 
enrichment or the improvement in the hatchery improvement in the husband ry. So, that i s one 
of the major correcting mechanism that you can go before for this kind of disease elimination .  
(Refer Slide Time:  27:36)  
 
So, the reason behind the several diseases are maj 0rly the poor treatment of the incoming 
water . The fresh water that is coming it has to be properly treated, that i s why RA systems are 
started becoming a very famous , RA  system re -circulating aquaculture system . The water 
because it needs a very frequent freshwater exchange like I mean like it can be the water 
exchange is very frequent .  
So, what you need to do whatever water that is com ing out of this plant of this fa rm or this 
tank, what you need to do , we can do you can have a proper  recirculating  aquaculture  
systems, which will treat that wastewater and the water after being treated that water can be 
again circulated back to the pond itself .  
So, the treatment can be the treatment problem can be minimiz ed treatment problem can be 
properly controlled by having this kind of recirculating aquaculture systems. Poor husbandry 
definitely it i s a bit of an issue like overcrowding or the higher stocking density , poor 
sanitation, if you do not have the proper cle anliness is maintained here and there is like da rk 
particles here and there, it i s it can cause a huge amount of nuisance in your pump.  
Non-existent  or insufficient quarantine  procedures, I told you, the moment you get to know 
about the disease or disease  causing particular sites, like particular  species, you have to shift  them  now and they a re like this, that moment only because they can spread very fast, very 
fast in this kind of species, this microorganisms which can which are causing this disease , 
disease causing microorganisms they can spread very fast . So,  the moment you identify the 
identify , no matter what you just simply catch them and shift it to the quarantine pond . And 
then you do the next kind of next  stage of troubleshooting, that i s the first thing that you need 
to do .  
(Refer Slide Time:  29:31)  
 
 
So, what are the conclusions from whatever we have discussed in this particular lecture that 
the crustaceans  are most valuable and highly traded seafood commodity.  Most crustaceans 
culture involve 76 percent  of the dislike this , world crustacean culture it involves almost 70.6 
percent  of the marine and 29.4 percent  of the freshwater production . It shares  the major producer of the crustaceans and the Macrobrachium rosenberg ii or scampi  is a giant 
freshwater prawn and is one of the most preferred commercial species in India and 
specifically, in Asian  region.  
Major producer of this scampi are China, Taiwan, pr ovince of China, Bangladesh, Ecuad or, 
India, Br azil, Malaysia, Thailand, etc a nd like these countries and then most ly the  Asian 
countries. W hat are the takeaways , crustaceans are the most valuable and the  highly traded 
seafood commodity the golda chingri, the mocha chingri  which are actually more famous in 
India like with these names rather than the scampi,  is the most preferred commercial species  
in India.  
Tropical , subtropical and the warm climates are the most suitable climate for the  prawn 
culture, if you want to do it  in the temperate region, if you want to do  it in the polar region, if 
you a re going to like more in the polar  side, so like whether it be north whether it be south , 
you have to take care of the environment, you have to focus more on the optimal condition 
that you can supply for your to your greenhouse .  
So, that you mean like you have to maintain that situation you understand, you have to 
provide a heating arrangement so that temperature will be optimum for  them to grow in the 
system. It i s a lot of activi ty, but it is doable and it is being done, it i s being done in different 
Scandinavian countries .  
Then the external fertilization  occur,  sometimes it requires in freshwater  prawns , giant  
prawns are harvested either partially or completely as they not do no t grow at a uniform rate. 
And it has to be handled very carefully during harvesting as they tend to turn mushy. T his 
Macrobrachium rosenberg ii is affected by several diseases, which is the reason behind 
because of the poor treatment of incoming water , overcrowding , poor husbandry and 
sanitation and insufficient quarantine procedures available in the farm. I hope this discussion 
that in this lecture will definitely enlighten you with the standard  practices for freshwater 
prawn .  
So, though I cannot go i n details with the detailed engineering discussion and all how to 
design and wha t will be the detailed concern,  the technical concepts  and all . For that you can 
go ahead with the references that is available here or if you have any issues, you can mail it to 
me, I wi ll be very happy to give you detailed lecture material or I can share you my lecture 
material from other from a regular class  in IIT , Kharagpur . So, that will give you some better idea about how to design these fa rms in general . So, that i s it f or this lecture. See you in the 
next section. Thank you so much . 
  
 