Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Module 02: Technology of Closed Aquaculture  
Lecture 10  
Raceway culture  
Hello, everyone. Welcome to the last lecture of the module 2, for the NPTEL online 
certification course, Advanced Aquaculture Technology. I am professor Gourav Dhar 
Bhowmick from the agriculture and food engineering department of IIT Kharagpur. So, in this  
particular lecture material, I will be discussing about the raceway culture, and how the raceway 
and the design and engineering specification of the raceway culture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:50)  
 
The concepts I will be covering this particular lecture mater ial is the introduction to the 
raceways, what are the advantages and disadvantages that is related to the raceway culture, the 
general criteria for constructing raceway, the type of raceway, the in -pond raceway systems, 
and these are the one that we will b e discussing more in details in this particular lecture 
material.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:15)  
 
So, you know the raceway, it is actually an intensive flow through system, it requires 
continuous flow of water for high density fish production, as you might hav e remember, like 
in the last lecture material, we have discussed about the flow through systems. And raceway is 
one type of intensive flow through system.  
So, it requires continuous flow of water and the trout, tilapia and the catfish are the one which 
are most commonly cultured in the raceway. There is one reason behind it, because these 
species can withstand some minor environmental changes as well, but because raceway which 
it has a continuous flow of water has been maintained. So, there is sometimes th ere is a 
possibility that some amount of water deterioration or there is a possibility of some amount of 
less amount of the quality, water quality parameters can deteriorate there is a chance.  
So, in this kind of cases, the fish like tilapia, catfish can easily survive because they do not, 
they can withstand these kind of minor environmental changes, and that can take place in the 
raceways. It can facilitate the maintenance of the water quality.  In general, the raceway has this 
raceway is still much better than the other flow through systems because it can continue the 
quality of the fish. So, it is ideal for the rural areas where irrigation canals are available, often 
build on sloping terrain, i n terrace to enable the falling of water from the tail of one unit to the 
head of the adjacent unit, and facilitating the oxygenation.  
So, you know like it is a cascade system in general we call it cascade systems, you know like 
one step wise. So, this be cause of this stepwise nature, or the because of this sloping terrain, 
sometimes what happened it can increase the oxygen present, the dissolved oxygen present in 
the water, how it can increase? If there is like more amount of splashing or more amount of 
water dropping like this nappy flow also if we can maintain, the water will get more amount of 
specific surface area, and if the specific surface area is higher, what will happen?  
The oxygen, the diffusion from the air to the, or the total air diffusion fr om the atmosphere 
surrounding atmosphere the water will be maximized. By this way we can increase the 
available dissolved oxygen present in the water, and this available dissolved oxygen can help 
in increasing the dissolved oxygen present in a raceway in g eneral. And it will help in all the 
aquatic species that is being cultured, and it can even if you go for higher stocking density, 
they can easily survive in this kind of system.  
So, that is the major advantage of these kinds of systems. And these kinds o f systems are 
majorly being utilized all over the world nowadays. It is considered as the future of one of the 
futuristic model of aquaculture practice, and it has the one issue which is I already discussed 
in the last present lecture material as well is t he self -cleaning.  
Self-cleaning is not always possible in this kind of system. Because of the because if you want 
to go for the self -cleaning, if you want to increase the velocity. So, what will happen? This 
velocity, the small fishes will fail to swim ra pidly. So, to remain the stationary, so if we go 
ahead with a self -cleaning thingy, so what will happen? It will cause our small fishes to be in 
a stress condition.  
So, that is why we would, do not want it to be, this the water quality, the water, the flo w should 
be as minimum as like the minimum as possible not as minimum like not so, like not so less 
that the water will be not in a continuous flow condition, but it has to continuity has to be 
maintained, but the self -cleaning velocity cannot be approache d in this kind of system, that is 
one of the major drawbacks.  (Refer Slide Time: 5:26)  
 
So, that drawbacks are also been somehow people from like scientists all over the world, they 
are working on it and there are a lot of technologies which are already  available, and there are 
technologies which will definitely be available in sooner future. So, to get rid of these issues, 
the disadvantage that is related to the raceways.  
What are the advantages of raceway? So, it can what is happening here, it is a co ntinuous flow 
of water. So, when there is a continuous flow of water, so, what will happen? It will definitely 
minimize the concentration of the metabolites in the hatchery, it can absence that DO depletion, 
the changes of water, changes of the freshwater,  or the presence of oxygenated water, what will 
happen?  
It will, because of the oxygenation of the water bodies, which is incoming inflow of water 
body, inflow water, which is coming into the this kind of tank, or raceway systems. So, what 
will happen? Th is raceway, it will have a very high amount of DO concentration in the 
incoming water, and it will help in get rid of the DO depletion issue related to the other flow 
through systems.  
It helps the force, it force the fish to exercise, that is the thing I discussed in the last lecture 
material also, that if you have this kind of flow through system, this flowing water which will 
help the force the fish to exercise to move rapidly, and if it will move rapidly, and if you can 
then provide them ample amount of  feed, they will grow very fast, and they will consume the 
feed.   
They will, while consuming the feed, this feed conversion ratio will be increased, because it is 
like simple like we go for exercise, we go for gym and all, then what will happen? Will beco me, 
we will be will feel more hungry, because our body needs more amount of nutrients at that 
moment. So, we eat food, and proper food and that food the conversion from that quote to our 
actual health, or the actual muscle regeneration will be much higher.   
So, that is the same way it happens to the aquatic species as well. So, they once they do a lot 
of exercise, and if you can supply it with the ample amount of food, they will consume the 
food, they will consume all the nutrient present in the food, and t hen they convert it to the 
viable biomass.  
This viable biomass is nothing but it will reflect in their weight. So, with time, the they grow 
very fast and they have a very like, this when you have this muscle rather than like, I mean 
like, do I mean my mus cle here like, to that is biomass which are generate, which are present 
because of the exercise is actually much tastier it says in different by the nutrition is that it is 
much better, much tastier than the one which are only like as go in shallow in natu re, and stays 
in the stagnant water bodies.  
So, that is why the freshwater fish which are in the upper, upstream joint of the river, when 
there is like the when you just come down off the mountain, those fishes, those freshwater 
fishes are very tasty, and  very they have much higher acceptance rate  than the fish in the plane 
area, river area.  
But okay sea is different, seawater is different, sea fish is different I am not going to compare 
with that, sea is different they have their own taste. And they have  their own specific  taste 
which is like different to the fish, freshwater fishes, and the freshwater aquatic species. So 
better survival rate for the hatchery fishes when reared in raceways before stocking, because 
they have already gathered enough the bio mass which is good enough for them to survive for 
the nearest of their life. And so, that is why in raceways we go for the this, we go for this 
rearing, the hatchery fishes and then we go for the the stocking.  
So, stocking it can be done in a very in a st agnant water body as well. Or we can go for the 
marketing pond, and all. Marketing pond where it is like it is a little bit smaller than the stocking 
ponds, where you can put the fish just in order to wait for the market demand. The moment 
there is market demand you just harvest it from the marketing pond, and you can provide it to 
the market, provide it to them, you can transport it to the market. This raceways, this it facilitates the visual observation of fish movement in shallow raceways. And which enab les 
the reduction in the management issues.  
So, sometimes we have issues like, different kinds of disease and all it can occur and if we can 
have a visual observation all the time what will happen? Because of the almost clean water, 
which presents in the raceways we can visibly see the culture species. So, if I see if we can see 
that there is some issue with some plants, sorry some cultural species, we can just not that, then 
at that moment only just take it out and put it in in the quarantine pond, in the  quarantine pond 
is what where we normally keep all the fishes all the aquatic species that were culturing, which 
are facing some issue, health related and all. We just take them, take them out so that it will 
not contaminate the other fishes in the or oth er aquatic species in that surrounding vicinity or 
in that tank or in the raceway.  
It can facilitate the convenient feeding because low area, high stocking density, just put a 
feeder, automatic feeder, which is very easy to feed, like the very low amount of energy it 
requires to develop. And that is it, you just keep on feeding the your species, or the cultured 
species that you are culturing.  
So, it is very easier to feed them because in a same place, or you can have a small automatic 
feeder in like 3 to four 4 different places in the raceways, and that is it. They will be very happy 
to have their food, all the time to time and it is like, it is more convenient, like it is more 
convenient to feed like 1000 people in a hostel than 1000 people in a market or in a bigger 
fairground, and all. So, it is like that.  
So, in case of disease outbr eak, fish can be treated before flushing out of the raceway. First of 
all, how disease outbreak can be minimized? Because water is continuously it is like there is a 
continuous flow of water, that can reduce the outbreak of the disease because of the disea se-
causing microorganisms can be washed out, it will not because in case of stagnant water, this 
spread of disease can be very high, it can be as low as in a couple of hour, it can completely 
spread over all over your farming species.  
However, in case of raceway, that is the good thing about in case of raceway, you do not have 
to worry about that. You do have to worry about that if it is in a very high concentration, the 
amount of microbiota which is responsible for the disease outbreak, if it is very high , then it is 
a big of a issue.  Other than that, you do not have to worry about it because anyway, the flushing is happening 
time to time. And also, you can easily the moment you can visually observe that if you are  the 
specialist, the fish specialists, th ey can easily identify the changes in their structure in their 
body mass ratio, or and they can easily take it out and put it in the quarantine pond. And so, 
that is how it is to be done.  
So, these are the advantages, these are the positive or pros part o f the raceways compared to 
the other flow through systems and other aquaculture techniques. So, that is why raceways are 
becoming very famous nowadays and that is how like that is why we are discussing about all 
this advanced technology right now.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:57)  
 
So, it maintains the laminar flow in general or plug flow. So, I hope you know what is laminar 
flow, what is turbulent flow etcetera, etcetera. So, based on the Reynolds number and all, so I 
think you have learned it in your physics, o r physics subject or if it is not, you can search for it 
if you want I can discuss about these things in our live session, but in general the this you can 
easily find it in Google what is laminar flow? What is plug flow? What is this turbulent flows? 
So, in general it is provided to avoid the settling of solids in the bottom.  
So, I can give you one example, what is a laminar flow, and turbulent flow? Just to give you a 
very broad perspective. When you switch on your, when you say switch on your tap so, when  
you switch in your water tap what will happen? The water will keep on dropping at one 
momentum it has a very singularity like, it is like a very homogeneous flow of water you can 
see, I do not know what exactly I have to mention here, like we see that the re is no disruption 
in the water flow.  
This is like it looks like a very crystal -clear water is coming out of the, or your water tap or 
whatever the liquid that you are targeting. That is called that is kind of laminar flow, the 
moment it has some disturb ances like turbulence flow. It is a very gross stuff example that I 
have given, there if you go and Google it and you will find very details about it like what 
exactly are these flows.  
The facility must provide the protection from outside pollutants, floo ding and the sedimentation 
that is the one of the major criteria for constructing raceway, you have to have a proper facility 
designed if it is outside, outside your farm. It has to be covered properly, if it is like inside your 
pond, the inside your farm definitely you had to has to have a proper protection from storm, 
from pollutants, from flooding, or from sedimentation and etcetera, etcetera. Since raceways it 
involves the flow of large quantity of water making it pumping system a critical factor in thi s 
design, the pumping system that it requires it has to be properly designed it has to be supplied 
with a supplementary pump as well.  
What do I need? Why do I need supplementary pump or kind of makeshift arrangement, or we 
can, that way like additional pu mp that we can do, we can have. Because sometimes there is a 
chance that pump may fail, or because of some reason or other. So, you have to have a backup 
pump ready with you, and that is the only one, that is the first thing that I am discussing here 
becau se like related to that there are other factors related to the pumping systems involves as 
well. Because, because  pumping system is the one because of what the water is in keep on 
flowing condition, or like it is keep on flowing over the raceway.  
So, that  is one of the major reason, if somehow it got any issue it involves any kind of technical 
issues. So, it can affect your farm output, it can affect your aquatic species that is dwelling 
there drastically. Because it will not supply with, it may not supply  with ample amount of 
oxygenated water. So, which will reduce the dissolved oxygen, and aquatic species will be in 
stress and they may die also. If it prolongs the this situation prolongs for a long period of time.  
The mean water velocity in v in a raceway  with water flowing from one -to-one end can be 
expressed as b, d, L upon a b, d this S into q ,  (𝑏.𝑑.𝐿 )×𝑆.𝑞
(𝑏.𝑑) So, here what is this b is the breadth 
of the tank, the d is the depth of the tank water in meter, L is the length of the tank in meter, S 
is the fish stocking density in kg per meter cube, and q is a specific flow rate. So, in general 
actually it is like volume by area. So, in general if you have the proper you know the length, you know the fish stocking density, and you know the flesh specific flow rate in meter cube 
per kg per hour. Remember we discussed about this in last lecture also.  
So, from this va lue, you can easily calculate if you multiply see the m multiplied by kg per 
meter cubed multiplied by the flow rate which is like meter cube per kg per hour. So, if you 
see it will come down to meter per hour. So, which is the unit of what is the velocity . So, that 
is how the velocity of mean water velocity in a raceway is calculated.  
Remember, it cannot be as high as the self -cleaning velocity as I already discussed in the last 
class. So, it is just the optimum velocity that it requires for your, the tar get fishing density and 
the specific flow rate that you want to maintain in your system, and the accord based on the 
length of your tank. Based on this 3 factor, you decide the mean water velocity in your, in a 
raceway.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:17)  
 
So, als o the water velocity should be maintained all the time to reduce the stress of the fish. 
And also, the energy wastage of the fish. What do I mean by the energy wastage? Water 
velocity, if it is not maintained continuously, first thing just remember one thi ng it is like when 
you start a start an engine and when you stop it and rather than if you have a continuous like if 
you keep on doing it suppose you have a vehicle which you are keep on starting it and stopping 
it in a very small duration, and another bik e another vehicle which will start from the same A 
to B, it will go from A to B with only one start and with stops at the end, which will consume 
more amount of energy, what do you think? Definitely the one which is keep on pausing, there 
is regular time i nterval it has to start, and you know the starting of engine requires a lot of 
energy.  
That is the same way, if you maintain the water velocity continuously, if we have a continuous 
flow of water, it will cause you less amount of energy, rather than if you  keep on starting the 
pond, and starting the pump and again stop it, and again start the pond, start the pump and stop 
it, what will happen? It will consume a huge amount of energy, also it will cause you the huge 
amount lot of stress in your fish because of the less amount of dissolved oxygen present in your 
system.  
You have to, the water velocity has to has to be maintained in order to avoid any wash away 
of the supplied food particles. The velocity cannot be as high as like whatever the feed material 
that you are providing it will not be utilized at all. Because the fish will not get enough time 
and because of the turbulence it creates because of the high -water velocity, the food particles 
will lost. So, that will cost you additional economic losses.  
So, we do not want to have this kind of additional economic losses, so, you have to put your 
automatic feeder, or say like manual feeding system when you were doing, you have to 
distribute it or broadcast it at a particular place where it can utilize, it c an be utilized as in a 
optimum way. So, that you have to identify.  
The materials used for this, and also you have to make sure the generated waste always in the 
suspended condition, how it will help? See, you cannot go for self -cleaning velocity. 
Sometime s it is a big of a, it is a problem, but what you can do? What do I mean by the self -
cleaning velocity? It does mean that all the wastewater all the waste, it is not getting enough 
time to get settled in the bottom of the pond, bottom of the trace plate. I f you can make the 
water run in a such a way, so, the velocity will be just optimum so, that just as the all the waste 
will be in the suspended condition. That is what the kind of self -cleaning velocity that is how 
we can attain the self -cleaning velocity.   
So, if these 3 can be managed somehow, because say suppose in case of long pond which are 
having their length is very high, you cannot attain the self -cleaning velocity it is very hard. 
Water velocity cannot  attain the third pond, it is very hard. Becaus e if you want to attain in that 
case, so, you have to increase the velocity very high, so that the suspended solids will not get 
enough time to get suspended, get settled on the bottom, but if it is like a small pond, if it is 
like a small raceway, the wid th, the length is very small like up to a certain limit. So, in that 
case the water velocity can be maintained so to attain the self -cleaning velocity. In this way, 
we can go for this self -cleaning we can attain the self -cleaning nature of the raceway and plus 
the waste can be well managed at the end of the system.  So, what the people are doing, scientists are doing nowadays? When you have a very long 
raceway. So, you put we distributed, we bifurcated in like 3 different small raceways, and we 
use the wate r velocity in the self -cleaning velocity level. So, like this way you can when you 
have a very large amount of pond, large amount of raceway you can bifurcated into 3 different 
systems.  
By this way, this is only a means only one type of example that I am giving to get rid of the 
problem of self -cleaning attaining the self -cleaning velocity. So, the material used for the 
construction is the concrete, earth with inner plastic cover for large outdoor raceways. Plastic 
as I discussed the HDPE, this FRP materia l, the fibre reinforced plastic, these FRP materials 
are very famous nowadays, the metal or wood that you can use for designing this kind of 
raceways.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:57)  
 
This is you can see the typical design, the schematic of a 40 meter cube race way. Which is 
taken from Samocha et al., 2019. You can see the reference from there you can look into this 
paper, it will be give you a very broad like an idea about what exactly I am discussing here. 
So, if you can see those air supply line with this deep  blue colour, with the air supply line is 
provided into the, there is 3 different channels mainline in these 3 different main as you see 
this is nothing but the airlift support, and the air lift pump that is there. So, in say, this green 
dots, green small dots where this air lift support that is provided in the main line.  
There if you see the big green horizontal lines, those are the belt feeder, in the belt feeder what 
is happening? There is like a conveyor belt system you have the it is keep on dropping,  there 
is like sometimes some amount of feed is dropping with time. So, it is providing, it is like the 
conveyor belt is keep on moving and it is providing the feed at a certain interval, that is the belt 
feeder and all, that is that is provided here.  
Then the water you can see this is the whole pond, which is like 2.5 meter by 27.3 meter in 
dimension, at each from the edge, from the both of the edge, 1 meter distance we have this 
catwalks, catwalks where we use, it is not the catwalks, or like it is th e catwalks which we 
normally use it for human intervention.  
Suppose the pond is very long. So, you have to have, you have reach to certain portion of the 
pond, certain portion of the raceway. So, then we have this kind of catwalk so where and this 
dotted one is the access door. You open the door you go to the catwalk, in the catwalk if you 
go, if you from there in the bottom 3 in the sorry in the 3 catwalks, which is present in the 
middle, they are having those bottom feeders they are incorporated with the  bottom feeder. 
Also, they are attached to the airlift support. But at the end, the last and the first, they have they 
do have only the catwalks and all. They have only the regular catwalks and all.  
If you see the middle portion, this in the middle where you have this blue lining, this is actually 
the air, this is actually also the this bottom pipes which are available you see this colour with 
the late with the light blue, with the light blue you can see this PVC, this pipes are available 
which this contin uous systems where you can see this, the this arrow sign which you see in the 
arrow sign, is like the spray nozzle, you can see from in the middle the spray nozzles are also 
you can see from there they actually the aeration is provided, the air diffusers a re there. So, this 
air diffusers are providing the aeration to the system, you can see the pipeline, you can see the 
grey line.  
This grey line is the 5 centimetre PVC pipe, it is should be PVC or in general I think orbital. 
So, this PVC pipes so where in general the V sign is actually the one where, there are like 
valves are present. So, in order to redirect the flow of water to the systems. So, when we design 
our raceway, we design it this way. So, this is a very standard practice of designing raceway. 
So, to have a water current, continuous water current and in a certain direction which will this 
if you see there is like screened pump intake. So, at the left chamber, from this pump intake we 
take the raw water into the reservoir, and from reservoir and th e raw water is coming to the this 
treatment units.  
So, from in the treatment units if you can see there is like 2 HP pump which is supplying it to 
the this foam fractionator, and also it is going to the settling tank, and we use this treatment to 
go for t his evaporation tank and all at the end, and then water is again after the oxidation is happening, after the treatment is done. Then water is again to the Venturi injector, and through 
the normal line it is going to the going back to the pond again. And so me portion of it also we 
take out depending upon the treatment requirement and all. Sometimes what we do we add 
some additional biofilters and all also. So, it requires it depending, biofilters are actually for 
the smaller size raceway, for bigger size rac eways we do not need the biofilter essentially, it 
depends.  
Everything that I am saying here it all depends on the design and specific requirement of your 
farm. So, this is actually a one standard diagram, one standard design or like the top view of 
the h ow it should look like, this raceway of this around 40 cubic meter of volume, how it should 
look like. So, I hope you have a better have a very, like good understanding about the system 
right now. Like how it should look like?  
And you can see this airlift  pump which are present in this airlift support after each catwalk, 
those are actually pushing the water forwards and this actually helping the water to make a 
continuous flow. So, that has other use as well. So, in general it makes this water flow possibl e 
in this kind of systems and the air supplies are there to provide the additional amount of aeration 
through the nozzle and through diffused aeration systems in this particular.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:39)  
 
So, what are the type of raceways? In general, we  have linear, we have tank raceway, and we 
have mixed -cell raceway. In case of linear raceway, it has a separate inlet and outlet. So, made 
of either concrete blocks, earthen channels with a trapezoidal or parabolic cross section, it 
should have a bottom g rid of at least 0.5 feet for per 100 feet. The length of this raceways are 
determined based on the site topography and along with the need of the reaeration or not.  
The width is determined on the basis of the available water supply, operation or maintenan ce 
needs, and the available harvesting equipment available with us, or available in the market in 
our nearby vicinity. Based on that, we go for linear channels, this is the easiest one, this is the 
easiest one to build that you can do.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:26)  
 
 
Second is the circular, rectangular, or the oval tank. The nozzles are used as inlet to enabling 
the rotary circulation. So, nozzles are not only providing the water, it provides the water in jet 
motion so, what will happen? It makes the initial  flow, and which makes within the tanks and  
whereas the standpipe and the bottom drain is connected at the tank centre for discharge. So, 
in general, in circular rectangular oval tanks what will happen? We provide the water with the 
nozzle, and the water w ill come out of the system, and if the nozzles are located above the 
surface of the water for aeration, and it will make a continuous flow, it makes the continuous 
flow possible.  
If you see the earlier design also, if you see in this design also the nozzl es are placed in a very 
certain angular way. So, it will make the water current possible. So, the in this kind of 
rectangular tanks and all. In general and also the I told you it is above the surface of the water. 
So, because the water when we come from th e above the surface, so it will once it will come 
as a jet, it will also add the aeration, it will make a small splashing thing, and because of the 
splash, because of this splashing thingy what will happen? The specific surface area it is 
increased, more a mount of air can diffuse into the water body. So, it is made up of concrete 
metal or the fiberglass in general. It is constructed at a sites having accessible water supply, 
adequate management of personnel feed and harvesting equipment.  
(Refer Slide Time:  30:55)  
 
The major one, which is developed this the mixed -cell raceways, MCR, which is developed 
by, which was developed by Watten et al. in 2000. So, what they did? It is a mixture of 
structural, it is a mixture of linear channel raceways and the circula r tanks within a single 
vessel.  
It fascinated the rapid solid removal, maintenance of uniform water quality, easier maintenance 
and husbandry, it is like possible here. Presence of vertical jet port manifolds the MCR, 
converts into the linear raceways, in to a series of adjacent mixed -cells, each having the 
hydraulically independent flow region, I discussed with you in earlier slides also. This MCRs 
are the one which have this hydraulically independent flow region. Because of that they are not 
related to ot her raceways which are present in its neighbouring, or in its vicinity or its adjacent 
to each other. And because of that, it can attain the self -cleaning velocity as well, if it depending 
upon our design and all.  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:03)  
 
You can see this is the  bottom centre drain, it forces the each cell to act as an individual circular 
tank, and from this discharge port, or discharge jet port, or the discharge manifolds, we call it. 
It presents the along with the sidewalls of them MCR, on the far le ft, or the single sided 
manifold composed of 5 nozzles directed across the width of the raceway, which this middle 
and the far right picture actually shows the double sided manifold, composed of see 10 number 
of nozzles in both of the sides. So, it will gi ve directed tangential to the this, towards the 
raceway wall. So, this is also one type of, this is also type of structure in MCRs we normally 
witness.  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:46)  
 
So, in general, let me give you a very brief overview of the design operat ion and the 
performance parameters related to the design of this MCRs. So, in general, this particular data 
is taken from the Labatut et al., 2007. It you see the paper, in the research report they have 
nicely designed a MCR system, and they have mentioned  what can be the standard water depth 
in MCR? What kind of the standard volume? As you can see from the value given here, the 1 
meter is a standard MCR water depth, the volume can have when to have a volume of say like 
91 cubic meter, with a flow rate of a round 152 cubic meter per hour, water exchange rate is 
also there like 1.7, the cell characteristics length is 5.5 meter, cell diameter to depth ratio 5.5 
to 1.  
So, these are the different parameters, which we need to focus on when we will be designing 
an MCR. So, the power requirement if you see almost 8.9 watt per meter cube of water 
treatment. So, 8.9 watt per meter, I am giving a simple idea, per meter cube means 1000 litre, 
so, for 1000 litre of treatment you need to have a 8.9 watt of power is requir ed, only 8.9 watt. 
In general the BTU unit, or in normally the normal like the household units that we calculate 
for electricity for 1 unit, it is actually 1 kilowatt hour. So, suppose these MCRs are working for 
like 1 hour a day or something.  
So, I am ju st giving just example. So, 1 hour, so, 1 hour per in 1 hour in MCR unit is taking 
like 8.9 watt per meter cube. So, in general it is taking like 8.9 watt hour for treatment of 1000 
litre of wastewater, so 8.9 watt hour is almost nothing, if it was for lik e, another 100 hour like 
continuously for 100 hour, then it will take 8.9 into 100. So, this is much 890 watt hour. So, 
still 890 watt hour is nothing compared to like 1 kilowatt, or it is like 1 unit it will take after 
running for 100 hour. So, just givin g you one brief idea about how these calculations take place 
and all.  
(Refer Slide Time: 35:11)  
 
So, in -pond raceway systems, and the another one is the in -pond raceway systems, as I 
discussed the raceway systems when we incorporate in the pond itself, i t is called the in -pond 
raceway systems, IPRS which are very recent and very highly innovative technologies, which 
are normally used nowadays all over the world.  
So, in the pond itself, we have this nozzle systems, we have this water circulation units by 
which we provide a continuous water flow. So, it is like raceway in a pond, in a big pond. This 
highly innovative raceway systems for increasing the productivity of subtropical fish species 
like Tilapia, within the existing fish ponds are very much famous nowadays.  
It involves the flowing of aerated water from one end, while removal of fish waste and uneaten 
food from the other end. The ultimate idea behind this system involves the continuous mixing 
and the aeration of water, the solid waste are collected 2 to 3 times per day using a vacuum 
pump.  
So, at the end of the raceway, we have the installation, so, from that installations we can suck 
the water through it and or we can utilize some depending upon the design, we can go for this  
vortex collectors and all these things, by which we can easily collect the solids that is getting 
deposited at the end of the raceway with time.  
(Refer Slide Time: 36:33)  
 
So, this is the in -pond, see this is one example of in -pond raceway systems. And so in general 
it is co nstructed using the concrete rectangular cells, like 2 to 3 per pond, and it is built parallel 
to each other. About 3 to 5 percent of the pond size is used for the raceway area. So, it is not 
more than that, in general if you have a say like 100 hectare of  pond size, so you will only use 
like around 5 hectare of area for the raceway, this kind of raceway design. You can go for 
Tilapia and all these cultures.  
(Refer Slide Time: 37:07)  
 
So, what is the difference between this IPRS over the traditional pond culture? It can increase 
the net yield and the growth rate, because see, flow through system, advanced systems it is a it 
has a very high amount of water circulation, because of that, i t can give you more amount of 
dissolved oxygen, which can help sustaining more amount of fishes, that means the stocking 
density can be improved, fish quality can be improved, because it is giving this exercise thingy, 
and also it can provide the ample amo unt of it just enough feed for their survival, the proper 
feed conversion ratio can be achieved.  
Overall, it can increase the net yield and the growth rate of the fish itself, it can improve the 
fish utilization, more reduction in the feed, feed utilizatio n it can like proper optimum 
utilization as I mentioned, it can improve the product quality, it can reduce the infection disease 
or the mortality rates, it can improve the water remediation as I already discussed, it can reduce 
the environmental impact bec ause the water saving can be taking place. It can help us like to 
treat the water optimally. So, that the at the end of the water, at the end of treatment, the water 
can be recycled  back down even if it is not, then it can be supplied to the it can be thro wback 
to the surface water body without damaging the surrounding ecosystems. The conservation of 
water due to recycling and reusings.  
(Refer Slide Time: 38:37)  
 
However, there are conditions required for optimal operational of IPRS. Stockfish should be 
clean and healthy, feed should be top quality, as I already discussed, the pond water should be 
kept always in a well -mixed condition, continuous removal of solid waste has to take place, or 
you have to make sure management of solid waste, the solid waste does not show any nuisance 
to the system, does not affect the system's quality and all. And the proper, the conditioning on 
the equipments that it has to be maintained.  
(Refer Slide Time: 39:07)  
 
So, in general, it is though self -cleaning is not always p ossible, but as we discussed, there are 
possibilities of making it in such a way that these kind of techniques can be self -cleaned. It 
requires a continuous flow of water for high density fish production, it can raceways can 
facilitate the increase net yie ld and growth rate. It improves the feed utilization, thus more 
reduction in the feed cost.  
(Refer Slide Time: 39:35)  
 
So, what will be the takeaway message for this lecture? So, the takeaway message which 
involves in this lecture is like the fish cultur e that it involves, so which like the advance level 
of intensive aquaculture systems, we can go ahead with this kind of raceway culture. And in 
the next module, we will discuss more like this kind of advanced aquaculture technology. So, 
thank you so much f or listening and have a good day.  
 
 