Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 27  
Balanced Diet and Feed Formulation  
Hello everyone , welcome to the second lecture of the modul e six balanced diet and the feed 
formulation . My name is Professor  Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  from the Agriculture an d Food 
engineering  department of Indian Institute of Technology,  Kharagpur .  
(Refer Slide Time 00:38)  
 
  
In this particular lecture  I will be covering the concepts like the components of balanced diet , 
I mean we  have already covered the discussion about the protein , lipid and carbohydrate  
content ; so today I will  be continuing the lecture along with the discussion with the vitamins 
and the  miner als requisites for the feed formulation .  
Then we will  discuss about what is  feed formulation , how we do that and what are the steps 
involved with it and how are standard methods available for the feed formulation . We will  be 
discussing about the cla ssica l Pearson  Square method in this particular lecture . As we know 
that the vitamin are an organic compound which are required to be in the aqua feed to support 
the fish growth and the  health .  
So it is almost like the same way we did we need those vitami ns in  our body some are  
essential ones like which really we want to have it in our system along with the food that we 
normally  fed with. So it is the same for fish as well for any aquatic species as well . In general 
vitamins are not actually synthesized by  the reared  aquatic  species and that is  why we need to  
provide them with the diet or the dietary supplements .  
In general this actually constitutes  around 5 to 8 percent of the total cost of the aqua feed  
however , those are essential . In general there are like two groups of vitamins  like for even 
human consumption also we know  these two types of vitamins first is water soluble , second 
one is fat soluble . What are the water soluble vitamins; like vitamin B  mainly like  thymine , 
niacin , riboflavin , pantothenic  acid, pyridoxine , cobalamin , biotin and folic acid and also 
vitamin C like ascorbic acid and the inositol .  So these are the one which are in general water soluble vitamin . So what are the fat soluble 
vitamins ? Vitamin A like the retinols , beta-carotene , vitam in E like tocopherols , vitamin D 
choleca lciferol,  then vitamin K that is phyloquinone . So these are the ones which are fat 
soluble vitamin . So these are very important information  that we need to remember .  
And vitamin C which is one of  the most important v itamin that has a powerful  antioxidant 
capacity and because of that it can enhance the immune system of aquatic organisms like fish 
and shrimp.  Vitamin E  is also  very good antioxidant; vitamin E and C  are important 
ingredients in the aqua feed  because  they can inhibit the dietary lipid oxidation , thereby 
improving the shelf life of the aquatic species .  
Vitamin deficiency can lead to reduced growth condition ; also they can highly disrupt the 
health  condition of the target aquatic specie s or the reared  quati c species . Vitamin C 
deficiency it leads to the  scoliosis or bent backbone syndrome we call it so whereas the folic 
acid deficiency causes the dark  coloration and all . So these are the symptoms by which you 
can identify that your targe t aquatic species or rearing  species is infected or like  having some 
vitamin C deficiency or like some  vitamin deficiency syndrome .  
In general the  ascorbic acid or like vitamin C  is an essential dietary  ingredients for teleosts 
waste as they lack the L-gluconolactone oxidase and what is this teleosts  like most of them 
almost like fifty percent of the  fin fish are actually called teleost all the  salmon species and all 
these things , so in general the ascorbic acid plays an essential role in penaeid shrimp  nutrition 
despite i ts limited ability to synthesize it .  (Refer Slide Time 04:30)  
 
  
So this is all the very generic discussion that we are having  where  I have discussed about , I 
am discussing about the  importance of vitamins for  the fish growth and the  health . The 
estim ated requirement for the water soluble vitamins in different  fish speci es are in given in 
this table 1 you can take a snap of it and to  whenever you will be culturing any specific type 
of vitamin , specific type of culture species you have to remember like what  is the amount of 
vitamin B 1, vitamin B 2 like riboflavin or like thymine is  required  or pantothenic acid like 
pyridoxine are required for your target  aquatic species .  
So we normally provide it in the unit is l ike unit in  milligram or nanogram in per k g of diet, 
so suppose you are supplying per kg  of dietary supplement or the feed , so in per kg what is 
the amount in milligram or nanogram  or microgram in general is the vitamin that it requires 
to be  supplemented with. So in continuation with it there are so me other examples of 
different other water soluble vitamins like biotin , folic acid , how these different water soluble 
vitamins are required , what is the amount that it required  for different fish species .  
Actually these are measured in the control enviro nment just to  make sure the values are 
actually very lab based result  and also here you see NR stands for the no requirement 
determined and  R is the required but no value actually determined . The same way we hav e 
also in this  table 2 mainly the  fat solubl e vitamins are shown in different fish species like  
vitamin A, vitamin K, D  and E. So how these different types of fat soluble vitamins are  
needed at which doses for different type of fish are  shown in this table .  In this table 3 I have shown estimated  vitamin requirement for a range of shrimp  species 
measured in the controlled environment again and if there  is a mixture of all the vitamins are 
given here with the data for  tiger shrimp and the freshl y pond and  the white shrimps  majorly 
and like even Indian  white prawn is also given . So for them what is the requirement of this 
specific vitamin and all , so that is given ; these informations are very much needed for us 
when we will be  doing the feed formu lation  study for our target aquatic species in our farm .  
(Refer Slide Time 07:14)  
 
  
So next and last important thing is the  minerals , so in general the aquatic organisms like fish 
and the crustaceans  what they do , they can absorb the dissolved mineral s from the water 
either through their gills or the oral  epithelium or via direct water intake . So these minerals 
are actually very  essential for their health being ; so in case of dietary minerals requirement 
are mainly influenced by the water chemist ry.  
Suppose in general most of the calcium requirement is alread y fulfilled by the water , 
sometimes the marine  organisms the water supplies even the majority of the magnesium , 
iron, cobalt , potassium , zinc and the sodium . So for  them this elements are als o being 
supplied by the natural water bodies , so why we need this  dietary  supplements ?  
In case of fish there are around 12 minerals which are  very important and it is identified to be 
supplemented with the dietary ; like when you will be supplying with a d iet or a specific fee d 
so that feed should constitute this  differ ent 12 minerals . What are those 12 minerals ; 
phosphorus , calcium , iron, copper , magnesium , iodide , manganese , potassium zinc,  sodium 
or chloride and  selenium . So these are the 12 which import ant minerals for the  fishing .  
For penaeid shrimp  and the lobster s around 7 minerals have been recommended to be  
included in the feed , which are those seven minerals copper , calcium , magnesium , 
phosphorus , zinc and selenium . So this copper , calcium , potass ium, phosphorus , magnesium , 
zinc and selenium are the seven impor tant and  very recommended by  the specialist to be 
included in the feed material when you will be supplying one will be formulated the feed .  So remember these are very important things we can not just feed our culture species with 
anything and everything , you have  to be very specific , the feed that you choose it has to 
constitute all these minerals , all the  vitamins required vitamins at a particular doses , all the 
required lipid , protein and th e carbohydrate concentration .  
So the reported mineral requiremen t for s everal shrimps  species are given here like you see it 
is given in terms of calcium  carbonate or calcium chloride , phosphorus , sodium 
hypophosphate and these things . So sometimes we ho ahead  with the potassium also with 
potassium chloride  or potassiu m sulfa te, so anyway this is the sources of the minerals and 
from which we normally  utilize it for at different requirement value that is given in milligram 
per kg  of dry matter .  
So it is a continuation of the same table where where there is a report in m ineral requirement 
for several shrimp  species usually like  the chemically defined diet , so mainly the fish meal , 
squid  meal , soybean meal and the shrimp  meals  are given here and how they can be supplied 
with the different  mineral constituents are provided in this table .  
(Refe r Slide Time 10:39)  
  
 
So next final thing that we will be discussing  about this in this lecture is about is the feed 
formulation and will continue this discussion in the coming lectures  as well . When we 
discuss about the feed formu lation it can be defi ned as the  method of measuring the quantity 
of feed ingredient that needs to be combined to form a single uniform  mixture that supplies 
all the necessary nutrients to the  reared aquatic organisms .  
So it can be of any type of feed but the feed should  const itute all the essential nutrient 
required for your  reared aquatic species . So the feed types in general the sinking feed like 
forms with the shrimp s processing resulting in like  compact pressure pelleted solid feed so it 
is readily pre ferred by the  bottom feeder  shrimp  so it is got sink down in the bottom of your 
pond or tank  and does not facilitate an appropriate survey of the feeding rate correctly by the farmer resultin g in a very lower  feeding rate and over feeding and thus deterior ating the water 
quali ty.  
So this sinking feeds has this demerits  or the disadvantages because it got easily  sunken in the 
bottom of the trunk or tank or the river body or the pond body , what  will happen you cannot 
have a proper determination of what is th e exact amount of fee d that is being utilized and 
which is actually the feed that is being wasted it is very hard to determine that factor in that 
case; it is not impossible but it is it is h ard in that case .  
So the next is the floating or the buoyant  feed, so this is  the mor e advantageous when if it is 
like in a floating condition but it all it also depends like if you  are providing a bottom feeder  
with the floating feed it does not  matter , does not  make any sense , it is a bottom feeder so you 
have to provide them with the sinking feed, otherwise the feed they will not come  to the top 
of the surface and  coherent with other ; mess with other organisms and definitely it will 
disrupt the whole ec osystem .  
So depending on the culture species if it is a polycult ure you have to provi de them with the  
floating feed as well as the sunken feed or sinking feed because in that case you may have the 
bottom feeder as well  as the surface feeder  or the top feeder . So in general the floating or the 
buoyant  feeds are produced  by the process of  extrusion during which raw materials are 
propelled using a screw with a barrel like extrusion device . 
So cooking of material  is taking place for around 30 se conds at 120 and 175 degree celsius at 
a very high  pressure , that is  why it is c alled high pressure  high temperature cooking 
procedures but by this means the feed that is coming  out of the system it is the extruded pallet 
so the extruded feed . It releases the pressure and because of  that it becomes puffy in nature 
just like  we had it in our regular  potato thing it is like we you may know what is Kurkure and 
all so this is actually the type of  feed that it looks like .  
Almost the same this protein feeds and all because of that the air  which is trapped inside the 
pellets it can easily fl oat in the water bodies.  So, increased gelatinization  of the starch of this 
feed of this kind of feeds  actually helps the feed to remain stable  for longer duration of time 
and enough time for fish to  take the meal completely .  
It also enables the farmers t o survey the fe eding intensity directly and to adjust the feeding 
rates accordingly and  maximizing the fish growth and feed use efficiency beca use you can control it , you can see that how much of the feed is  actually being left from fish is not being 
not e ating it like o r not and based on that you can  have even idea about if some unrest or 
some disease has been broken  or there in a farming produc ts or reared  species or not .  
Because if they are under stress they will definitely eat less and based on that wh en it is a 
sunk en feed, it is very hard for you to identify like which is the feed and which is the excreta 
and all this thing , so no dif ference though like I am  just giving an example . So you  cannot 
have a proper say about those things , in case of floatin g fee ds or the buoyant feeds you can 
have a say about that this much feed is being unutilized so that means definitely your  reared 
species  have some issue just go and check them and definitely they are in under stress 
condition . So this is one of the posit ive things  about the floating feed .  
Other than that in general aquatic feeds basically  of two types dry and non -dry; dry feed s are  
normally made up of dry  ingredients or mixture of dry or moist ingredients in general , 
however they are not completely free of moisture . Moisture content can be up to 13 percent 
depending on the environment but still 13 percent is very less so  when you to uch it when you 
feel like it is a very dry one .  
Dry feeds  are compacted into a definite  shape generally by mechanical means and we call 
them pellet , I will  show you how it looks like . Depending on the  formulation and the 
compacted technique these diets ca n be floating , non-floating and the sinking  in water that we 
already saw .  
(Refer Slide Time 16:00 ) 
  
 
 See this is calle d the  pellet feed , how it looks like this pellet feeds and also in general most of 
the pellet feeds  it can be dry , it can be sunken , it can be sinking  or something or it can be a 
floating one . Flake feeds  are there  depending upon the size and then  target reared  species ; the 
feed can look like a crumble feed or the powdered feed as well .  
There are another very advantageous like  advanced stage of feed that is being supplied 
nowadays at least for maximum utilization of the feed actually is the micro encapsula ted 
feed.  We use  calcium  alginate  and all  these things different linked proteins and all as a 
covering agent or as a  final laye r, so this final  layer and what it this encapsulates and it how it 
helps actually  because  of this encapsulates and all  because of  this outer laye r which is quite 
rigid  and because of that the feed does not  go waste for long period of time , first of all .  
Second it can be well  utilizable by the ; it is actually also biodegradable  I mean like not 
biodegradable,  they can easily consume it it is not har mful that is also made up of this  as I 
told you calcium alginates and all this linked protein that we normally use for this upper layer 
coating . So that is also consumable like that can also be consumed by the aquatic species or 
the reared  aquatics species .  
Plus the good thing about these things  I told you like the maximum utilization of  the feed is 
possible so that is why this micro encapsulated feeds are becoming very famous and now it 
has been  already used all over the world majorly.  Another good thing is it is not easily water 
soluble  other feeds are  when it in touch with the water after a certain moment of tim e it 
exfoliated .  
And because of that it is dissolve in the water there is a chance of it there is some turbulence 
and but in cas e of micro encap sulated feed it will not dissolve in water for long very long 
period of time , even like it is really long perio d of time so the fish will get enough time to 
capture it and consume it for their  consumption purpose . Non-dry feed it can be of wet or 
moist , wet one where  it is like entirely moisture in nature like the trash fish , waste  
slaughterhouse  products , undried forage,  etc.  
So it has a moisture content of around 45 to 70  percent , whereas the moist feed it is in 
between wet and dry raw material , so it is like 18 to 45 percent of the moisture content , so 
then we call it moist feed . It is clearly a division  between  the moist and the wet you can easily 
understand .  Another third class of products is  available that is called we call flake products; it is a ctually 
designed for aquarium  fish, fish fry and very  early post larval shrimp s and all . So what are 
the st eps that  normally we follow when we go for the feed formulation , normally gathering a 
comprehensive knowledge and information regarding the ingredien ts in terms of their  
availability in the market ?  
Chemical composition along with their consistency and sea sonability is important when we  
discuss about the fee d that we are supplying to our reared  species . This can directly help to 
determine the cost of  ingredients and in turn the price of the feed , so suppose you need  huge 
amount of protein for rearing  certai n amount of species of specific type of vitamins  but you 
know  that you cannot just go 100 percent because if you go a certain  particular  limit it wil l 
cost you a lot .  
So you have to optimize the expectation from your rearing species , their feed requiremen t 
and you have to optimize the cost that  it incurs . So optimization of this cost and feed nutrient  
requirement is what we  do in a feed f ormulation pr ocess by using different ingredients of 
different  nutrient demand .  
There are mathematical formulae which a re applied to calculate the amount of  each 
ingredients needed to be incorporated to be compounded feed mixture and this mathematical 
formula  used in general the major mathematical formula that we use in aqua feed formulations 
are classical pearson  square or  box method , there is another method we use complex linear 
programming .  
I will discuss in  this lecture material how classical pearson s quare or box method is used and  
in the next lecture  I will be discussing about the complex linear programming methods an d 
how this complex linear programming is used for calculating  the feed formulation or the 
aqua feed formulation.   (Refer Slide Time 20:5 4) 
 
  
In case of the other  notable things in feed formulation is like verification of the stages of 
various essential  amino acids , so make sure that each stages of your aquatic species each 
stages of  development of aquatic species it is supplied with th e proper amou nt of dietary  
supplementation and it contains the essential amino acids .  
So this essential amino acid is v ery minor this calculation is very sensitive because it varies 
raw material to raw material and what type of raw material  that you will be supplying so that 
in what a  percentage and how much dilution that you need , how much addition what is the 
other chemi cals that you need to add to extract that amount of amino acid .  
So all these things required and constituents  a very huge data loading and that data  if you 
properly analyze you need to  have a proper idea about the different programming methods , 
how you ca n formulate this proper exact feed formulation process . Earlier it used to do like 
randomly in a broadcasting method and randomly they c alculated , but now things are 
changing , systems are improving and people are using .  
All the agriculturalists and the  aquaculturists and also right now they are started making 
themselves  well versed with all the advanced technology and there are different people from 
diffe rent sector actually coming together to  help blooming the aquaculture sector , agriculture 
sector  and they are working on optimization of feed formulation by using the linear 
programming or all these advanced  technologies . So that  the final  feed that you wi ll be 
preparing is ample  enough and perfect for your target aquatic species .  In case of cl assical pearson square  method  I will discuss about it like how it looks like , how 
to do the calculation and all , in short we call  it PSM.  So is the simplest method f or feed 
formulation , ideally involves two to four ingredients . The moment it  increases the four 
ingredients you cannot solve using this PSM method . PSM  method is only  possible up to four 
ingredients ; I will  show you a very easy example how  to calculate it i f you want  to know 
much more because it contains like some mathematical application  and all so  I will not go in 
details but very basic discussion , how the calculation is taking place .  
So suppose  I am giving one example where you have to prepare an aqua fe ed with 25 percent 
crude protein , how much percentage of crude protein you need ; 25 pe rcent in your final aqua  
feed. You have two sources  I mean two ingredients of this crude protein , first ground nut oil 
cake GNOC  and second is rice bran . GNOC  and rice bran are  the ingredients which has the 
source  of which is actually utilized for the sourc e of crude protein .  
Now the additional information what we  know ? We know that in case of in case of groundnut 
oil cake it has a protein content of 31.8  percentages  and in cas e of rice bran it has a protein 
content of 12.2 percentages . Now what are the inf ormation that we  have we need final 
product 25 percent crude protein , raw materials we know two  raw materials are provided with 
GNOC  and rice brand 31.8  and 12.2 percentage of  crude protein .  
How we use this information to formulate and how we calculate wh at is the exact percentage 
of crude protein  or exact percentage of  GNOC  or exact percentage of rice bran is actually 
required for our final product , final aqua feed  with 25 pe rcent crude protein . It is a very easy 
method like  there are thousands of  ways you can do that , you know  it is a very basic class 9 , 
10 level  mathematics even before that , so here is with the calculation with this box method it 
becom es much  easier .  
Suppos e in the box initial crude protein  concentration of GNOC  is 31.8 and it is in the  top left 
bottom top left side , in the top right you see 12.8 which is the concentration of the crude 
protein  in the rice bran and what is the final tar get crude protein  25 pe rcent you put it in the  
middle . Now diagonally opposite way you just simply  do th e calculation of subtraction how 
you are  doing is 25 minus 12.8 , how much 12.2 you put it in the just diagonally opposite side 
you write it in 12.2 .  Same way 31.8 minus 25 is  how much  6.8, you always do the mod value what value of this 
subtraction  means o nly the positive values are are considered 12.2 in the bottom how it 
comes you understand , 25 minus 12.8 , 12.2; 31.8 minus 25 , 6.8.  
So now you  add thos e two these differences  12.8 plus 6.8 how much 19.6 ; so we need this 
value so  percentage of GNOC  will be  12.8 divided by 19.6 multiplied by 100 , it is 34.7 
percentage and what will be the percentage of rice bran 6.8 multiplied  by 100 divided by 19.6 
which is 65.3 percentage .  
Percentage of GNOC = (12.8×100)/19.6 =34.7 % 
Percentage o f rice bran = (6.8 ×100)/19 .6= 65.3%  
Suppose now I say for your own understanding I am giving you another  kind of exercise just 
for your understanding suppose  you have to have a f eed which should have at least 40 
percentage  of crude protein , you need 40 percent as a crude  protein in  your final aqua feed  
and you take GNOC  and rice bran only , same example I am  giving , but suppose the 
percentage is different in case of GNOC  like the  initial crude protein concentration instead of 
31.8, I am saying like it is a very raw one which is havi ng a very low  crude protein 
concentration say like around 22 percentage .  
So 22 percent screw protein is available from the GNOC  and suppose in case of rice bran it is 
like in a very fortified  rice bran and all so because of that it has a very high protein  
concentratio n say like around  25 or 26 percentage ; so say 26 percentage of crude protein  
available with rice bran and GNOC  like what you say it is 15 or 16 they suppose like 15.   
So what will be the final concentration of each of this brand , each of these  things which  is 
requir ed for you to have a final crude  protein  40 percentage ? I want you guys to do that it is 
really tricky but  I want to use your bra in how you are  going to do that , what kind of method 
you are  going to  do that and in order to do that yo u may have to  in you may have to google a 
little bit about the feed formulation  procedures and which will definitely help you .  
So the number which appe ars in the middle of the square is the one is the most important 
number it represents the nutritional re quirement of an aquatic species which is protein  in this 
case and major disadvantages of this method is you  cannot work with more than four 
ingredients at a time .  (Refer Slide Time 28:41)  
 
  
I will discuss more about this method feed formulation metho ds like linea r programming and 
all in the next  lecture . So in conclusion what we can see in this  lecture material we discussed 
about the vitamins which are often not synthesized by the rear ed aquatic  species and that is  
why you must need to provide it with  the diet , what are the types of vitamins , water  soluble 
and the fat soluble , different deficiency of different vitamins we discussed .  
And aquatic spec ies can absorb we discuss about the way how in general aquatic species  can 
absorb their dissolved minera ls from water  either by their gill s, by oral  epithelium or by the 
direct water intake and we gathered the knowledge about the fish feed ingredients and  which 
will help us to formulate the feed .  
So what is the major takeaway from this  lecture , I would say first of all vitamins are majorly 
it constitutes around 5 to 8 percent of the total cost of the aqua feed  you have to  remember 
this. Vitamin C is very t he most important vitamin as it is a very powerful antioxidant , 
vitamin E is also and feed formulation i s basically a pplied nutrition and how you do that is  
one of the methods  we discussed classical Pearson  square method and complex linear 
programming meth od we will  be discussing  in the coming lecture .  
So these are the references that you can  take a picture  or you can p ause the video and you can 
go search for it in the google , so to have a better idea about on this discussion . Thank you so 
much so we will discuss more about the feed formulation in the coming lecture , thank you .  