Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 2 9 
Feed Additives  
Hello everyone,  welcome to the lecture 4 module 6 Aquafeed Techno logy. My name is 
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick and I am from Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Department of IIT, Kharagpur .  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:39)  
 
So in this particular lecture, the concept that I  will be cov ering are the introduction to feed  
addit ives, what are the different types of feed additives, mainly I will  be covering , 
phytogenics, organic acids, yeast products and probiotics in this particular lecture. I t will be 
continued for the in the coming lecture as well with some additional different  other ty pes of 
food additives. So, in this particular lecture, I will  be covering this  part.  (Refer Slide Time: 1:04)  
 
So, in general, you know, aqua feeds, which are normally formulated using  a variety of 
ingredients, the m oto for, which is what like to supply  the necessary nutritional requirement 
right, for your aquatic species or whatever the culture species that you  are rearing for their 
normal physiological functions  and all . It also ensured the proper ingestion , digestion, 
absorption  and transport ation of the dietary nutrients to the cell, various non-nutritive  feed 
additives are normally added to the aquafeeds .  
So, you can understand what is the reason behind this non-nutritive  additive feed additives . 
Those are as from the name itself we can und erstand t he non-nutritive  like they are not 
supplied because of some nutritional purposes, but for some other purposes, okay. I will  
discuss with you the details like what is the reason behind it, why we supply this kind of non-
nutritious  feed additives al ong with the aquafeed.  
In general,  certain feed additives like, pellet binders, the preservatives like anti-mold  or anti-
microbial  compounds or antioxidants are normally used to improve the feed quality what I 
say first the pellet binders, different kinds of preser vatives it can be anti-mold  or antifungal it 
can be anti-microbial  compounds and antioxidants . In general,  these are the one of the major 
reason , one of the major purpose of providing with this non-nutritive feed  additives to 
improve the feed qual ity.  
Sometimes enzymes  are also used as additives to improve the nutrient availability like what 
kind of edible nutrient I mean like protease , amylases . This kind of nutrien t availability can be increased, enhanced by using this specific type of enzyme th at can be  supplied along with 
the fee d or in some cases to eradicate certain anti nutrients like you know phytase, non starch,  
polysaccharides enzymes and etc.  
So, in order to eradicate the any possibility of having any anti nutrient like presence of 
phyta se or nonstarch polysaccharide enzymes, we supply with some any beneficial enzymes 
along with the feed and all. 
(Refer Slide Time: 3:10)  
 
Sometimes they are added to improve the performance and the health of the species of your 
rearing  specie s. So, that these ar e like the m oto of you know, why I already discussed like 
what is the reason , why we supply the food additives which are non-nutritive  in nature, but 
still we supply it for the benefit of for some other benefits. So, what are these food additives 
that we a re talking about?  
There are mainly six different type of food additives that we normally supply along with the 
feed. So, the feed is normally constitutes like I remember we already discussed what are the 
when we do the feed formulation  or what are the cor e nutrients that we normally target for 
our any depending upon the rearing  species, protein carbohydrate, lipid , vitamin , minerals, 
etc.  
So, along with those, we have to supply this food feed additive  as well. It actually based  upon 
the type of species an d also the rea ring condition and also what  is your farming requirements 
and all . So, what are these feed additives,  it can be phytogenic , organic acids, yeast product, probiotics, enzymes , mycotoxin  binder, etc. Out of th ese six in this part icular lecture, I will 
mainly be covering the top four the phytogenic , organic acid , yeast , and its products and 
probiotics.  
In the coming lectures we wi ll discuss and I will  discuss about the enzymes and the 
mycotoxin binder s. Listen to it very carefully,  it is very import ant and will give you a very 
basic idea about some very basic nutritional phenomenon.  
(Refer Slide Time: 4:47)   
 
So first thing that I will  be discussing about this different feed additives are the phytogenic s. 
So wh at is phytogenic s? It i s actually a pla nt, phyto is you  can understand p hytogenics from 
its word you can understand it i s actually something related to the plant , plant derived 
products. So, in general the plant derived products when it is added to th e feed which is for 
the non-nutritive , for non-nutritional  purposes then it is called the feed phytogenic feed 
additives and all . 
They can either be supplied as a solid , dried or in grounded f orm or sometimes as an extracts  
or essential oil. So, in general  this content on this a ctive substances pres ent in this phytogenic 
feed additives are depending upon the harvesting season among the based on the which part 
actually we are using like you know seed , root, leaf, or bar k and also depending upon the 
geographi c location . Please corr ect it, it is not par tly used , it is the  part which is used. So, like 
seeds, root , leaf or the bar k and the geographic origin that particular additives  and all .  Active ingredients like phenolic and flavonoid , flavonoid compounds pre sent in this additives 
can extract in multip le effects, it can exert multiple effects on the aquatic species like first the 
stimulation of appetite , say again  the stimulation of the gastric juices  and all . So, these are the 
reason for which we supply this this phenolic and flavo noid compound which i s present in 
the phytogenic , phytogenic feed  additives and all.  
In general,  this phytochemical compounds or the redox active they are actually redox active 
compounds and they can increase the , they can process th e antioxidant character istics which 
can actu ally improve the general physiologic condition of your aquatic species.  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:44)  
 
So, other than that, what is the purpose of this phytogenic compound , anti-microbial  activity . 
Due to the presence of this hydrophobial , hydrophobic essent ial oils, if we supplied with 
some hydrophobic essential oils and all it can intrude into the bacterial cell membrane and 
disintegrate  it. So, the bacteria which are non-essential  which are like, disease causing 
microorganisms and all .  
This disease causin g microorganisms can be like say it  is like a particular type of 
microorganism like say a particular type of bacteria, which you are not expecting to have in 
your feed and all. S o, what you wan t to do you want to supply with the antimicrobial agents 
and wh at can be the anti-microbial  agents in this particular case you can  supplied with some 
phytogenic , add compounds  and all w hich has this anti-microbial  capacity or the activity 
which will actual ly cause the bacterial cell to damage how they wil l they are ha ving this hydrophobic essential oil which will intrude through the bacterial cell membra ne and it will 
burst  it and that because of that, it will disintegrate and it will die.  
Other than that anti-inflammatory  and antioxidant activities also can be trigge red by using 
this kind of phytogen ic and all, we can garlic it like it just to give you an example, if you use 
the garlic extract, in any case or any of your teleost s and all.  So, what will hap pen it will , it 
has its antimicrob ial and immunost imulant activ ities you know that garlic in general, even in 
for human consumption also we us e it on for the same purpose it i s also it can cause s, 
because of the presence of allicin  it can be considered as an immuno stimulant and also it has 
antimicrobial p roperties as well.  
So, the same can be utilized same can be, we can add we can same  can be extract , the garlic  
extract that  is why garlic extract  can be added at a particular amount to the feed when you  are 
supplying it to your rea ring species. So, that t hey will be t here they can be very, they can be 
having a very healthy body and all that they will be healthy, they ha ve a very high amount of 
immuno structure , immune structure and al l. 
So, they can easily get rid of all the unnecessary inhibition by any u nnecessary 
microorganisms and all those okay. So, the p eppermint and  cinnamon and also use sometimes 
as a food additive, it can reduce the microbial load in the gut, and to improve the growth 
performan ce and the fish health  status . 
Phytogenics  are added in  aqua feeds in  concentration ranging from say like 100 gram per ton, 
or like 0.01 percent  of diet to 2 to 3 kg per ton like up 0.2 to 0.3 percent  of the diet on the 
basis of the type and concentration o f the active compound . So these are very important feed 
additives  that you need to remember about th ese phytogenics and all.  (Refer Slide Time: 9:44)  
 
Feed supplemented with oregano  essential oil or because of its phenolic  compounds present 
in its like carvacrol or thymol  it can promote the growth of channe l catfish  and all. Rosemary 
extracts can be used to treat the streptococcus iniae infection in tilapia . Application of the 
combination of thymol and carvacrol, it can improve that food conversion ratio  in white leg 
shrimps and all.  You know, FCR, Food Conv ersion Ratio .  
So already get a glimpse about it, how it is to be calculated, and we  will discuss more in 
coming lectures. So, this all is essential, you know, all these phenolic  compounds and all are 
very important which in turns actually help in getting rid of our di fferent microbial load and 
all and it can improve the overall immune structure of the, of your target species.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:34)   
 
The second type of food , feed additives that w e will be discussing about today is the organic 
acids . From the name  itself, we can  understand why we use different kinds of acidic material 
like lactic acid , acetic acid , citric, butyric , formi c, propionic , sorbic, and malic acid and all.  
So, why we use t his organic acids ? We use this organic acid  to improve the gut perfo rmance.  
So, in general the fish gut health and performance can be increased can be enhanced by 
adding the organic acids it can decrease the pH of the stomach and also it can not only it c an 
decrease the pH of the stomach, but also its small i ntestine also  and which leads to the 
increased activity of the digestive enzymes which reduces the load of gram negative 
microorganisms , gram negative bacteria  and all .  
So, in general, these acids  can enhance the, increase the performance of this gut micr obiota. 
And b ecause of that, in general it becomes your rare species will become more healthy and 
give much better performance . Available in a variety of forms general, like majorly in 
adsorbent form l ike liquid acids  or mixture of acids,  adsorbed into ine rt or solid s ubstances 
like silica or the vermiculite.  
So, in general, they can be found not only as an as an a dsorbent , but also it can find it as a salt 
also usually  solids or sometime s as liquid li ke ammonium  propionate, or  ammonium format e 
etc. So, e ither of this form you will get it majorly. T here are other forms also you can get in 
one major you will get in in either in adsorbent  form or in salt form okay, this kind of organic 
acids.  So, just re member why we need organic acids, it can decrease the pH of stomach and the 
small intestine. So, increase the activity of the digestive enzymes causing the reducing the 
load of the gram negative microorganisms. So unhealthy microorganisms to be precise .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:38)   
 
In general,  the liquid acids or ble nds a re added with a feed sometimes directly by spraying 
whereas the solid acids  or acids salts are added directly via special pre mixture by making a 
very small fine texture . Addition of 0.3 percentage sodium di-format e in the diet of tilapia 
fingerlings signi ficantly improve their protein efficiency ratio and protein retention.  
So see this the y very minimal amount it  is actually very small , amount is very small the 
amount of acetic compo unds that you  are supplying these organic acids are supplem ents is 
that a ctually very small, but it can increase the performance of your aquatic species can 
increase the performance in terms of protein efficiency ratio, it can perform in case the 
performan ce in terms of food conversion ratios and all for your micr oorganisms.  
So, it will give you maximum benefit in different sense, first of all, if you it increases the 
protein efficiency or the food conversion ratio, the less amount of uneaten feed will be t here 
the most and the feed can, the feed  to fish biomass conver sion will be maximum the 
wastewater generation will be minimized. There are like there are bunches of, you know, 
positive things about it like when we have this kind of , we can add these kinds of feed 
additives and the minimum amount of addition can increa se the pro duction capacity and 
increase the yield increase the overall performance  like anything for your product.  Like I am giving a couple of another other examples like penaeus m onodon it is supplied with 
the feed supplement with 1  percent  of commercial  acidifier s like sodium butyrate and all. Can 
improve the digestibility of crude protein , dry matter , and the energy harvest ing will be much 
here. Leading to the improve ment in the feed conversion ratio , weight gain and survival for 
penaeus monodon species  and all .  
So if we  supply the sodium butyrate at a given ratio like you can easily search google it and 
you can find the literatures available on it. Like what will be the percentage of sodium 
butyrate that you need to supply to when you  are preparing the  feed for your species. So 
based on that, once you know the number and when you prepare the feed for it or suppose 
your feed manufa cturing company by yourself you a re de veloping a feed manufacturing 
company by yourself how to do that.  
So to increase the p ercentage.  So, to increase the you know, the production of penaeus 
monodon and all.  Addition of c itric acid like a 30 gram per kg in the diets of Labeo Rohita or 
in gene ral, we wi ll call rohu fish . It improved the total their phosphorus digestibility like 
anything o kay. So, how to do that we add a 30 gram per kg of citric acid concentration along 
with the diet that ’s it, you will your R ohu culture will be increased like p roduction can be 
increased because their phosphorus digest ability w ill be increased and  that will  help their 
overall performance an d all.  
Additional 2  percent of sodium butyrate in shrimps diet  to improve the feed intake diet 
attractiveness and also the co efficient of apparent  digestibility which in terms caused the 
energy and the phosphorus  digestibi lity as well okay. So, that is why we normally supply this 
different our reared aquatic species  with a different type of feed additive. So, we already 
covered about organic acids.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:00)  
 
The third thing that is another essen tial fee d additives that I will  be discussing today is about 
is the yeast product okay from the yeast itself you from you defini tely you remember you 
know that sa ccharomyces cerevisiae or we which is like famously known as baker's yeast or 
is actually very  essenti al even for a different human food preparation as well .  
For animal feed pre paration even specifically for a quafeed preparation also it is very 
important.  This ye ast product  which  provide the exceptional nutritional content and 
availability and it is used as a source of p rotein and nitrogen sometimes. I a m telling you 
when it is used as protein and nitrogen  content source directly, so, then it may consider as a 
feed okay like nutritional supplement, but when it is used as some other purposes like wh en 
you s ee yeast fractions  and it  is pro biotic live like yeast, or purified products  like beta glucans 
or the nucleotides are used as a function al feed additive . 
In this case, we a re not utilizing exactly as for nutritional purpose, but rather than it is u sed 
for the immunostimulatory purpose okay immunostimulatory purpose means i t is used to 
enhance the immunity of your fish or aquatic species, when it is used for  this purposes, it is 
called the immunostimulatory properties and all. S o in that sense it is in that case it is not 
considered as a nutritional source but rather non nutritional feed additives  sources .  
It will because why it has this particular type of c haracteristic because of  the presence of 
mannoproteins, beta g lucan , nucleic acids and the chitin. So,  presence of this four products 
actually four products , four components are the reason why they have this specific type of properties and why it is famous ly used as a probiotic as these  yeast products  are why 
famously us e in as  a feed additives and  all. 
The most commonly used aqua yeast  species  is Saccharomyces cerevisiae  or the baker ’s 
yeast and the torula yeast. So, just remember this baker's yeast is ver y important, when you 
supplying it with your additives it will definitely give you much higher  perform ance or like 
your fish will be more in healthy state.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:29 )  
 
So, in general the fish and shrimps, the yeast can help in survival , growth and the gut 
maturation and al so can improve the immune and the antioxidant system  and all . The 
utilization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae  or the baker's yeast during the tilapia cultivation can 
improve the growth performance and feed efficiency here fee d efficiency means the 
conversion efficiency can be improved.  
Dietary supply with the yeast im proves the immune system along with increasing the 
resistance  again  the bacterial infections in hybrid striped bass and al l so, not only it helps in 
increasing t he immune system in developing the immune system, but definitely once it is 
helps in developing  the very higher strength immune system , it will definitely help in 
increasing the resistance against any bacterial infection.  
So, by this means, they ca n be utilized for hybrid striped bass and all the production 
productivity of this aquatic species can  be incr eased . Rainbow trout fry they normally fed 
with two yeast  strains Saccharomyces cerevisiae  and second saccharomyces boulardii. So what they do they  it because of the presence of this yeast strain s, along with the fee d. It 
demonstrates impro ve intestinal mi crobiota and brush border enzyme activity.  
So this enzymatic activity can be increased it will passively, and sometimes active and 
sometimes passively can also increase the overall consumption like you know improve the 
consumption efficienc y and not only that it  can help in grat ing giving them a much more 
immune boosting capacities . 
Yeast has this b eta glucans which are used in aquafee d as immunostimulant and can improve 
the survival of fish and shrimps . Just remember this is composition beta glucan , beta glucans 
are actually very much essential for a aquafeed  in general we normally use it for most of the 
fish and shrimp  culture. So, it  can even be used for immunostimulants and can also improve 
the survival of fish and shrimps.  
(Refer Slide T ime: 20:37 )  
 
Cellular yeast  components like mann an oligosaccharides can promote the growth of useful  
microbial bacterial population leading to a h ealthy and well functioning intestine . This 
mann an oligosaccharides , it can prevent the intestinal cloning by binding a few  gram negative 
microorganisms or bacteria and facilitating the removal of such bacteria from the gut. So, 
how we can get rid of this gram  negative bacteria , they help they first of all they prevent the 
intestinal cloning by binding this microor ganisms . 
After the binding is done they make from a clog and they can be easily removed from  the gut 
much better way  by this way they can help in  maintaining proper environment in the gut microbiota environment in the gut inside the gut and the intestines.  So, to impr ove the 
performance of the  aquatic species itself.  
Yeast extracts  are normally can be used as a source of nucleotides  as well.  For 
complementing the de novo synthesis of cells, what is the why the source of why the source 
of nucleotides are hel ping for com plementing the de novo synthesis what is the de novo 
synthesis ? de novo synthesis is like, in general in by terms de novo synthes is means 
synthesize of higher compounds say like a complex compound from the smaller compound or 
in a simple compo und this is w e call it de novo synthesis . 
Do you understand like complex compound can be formed from the simple compound from 
simple to comple x. So, this formation in general ly sometimes occur in  the inside the cell 
naturally like we use formats and all fo r different k inds of in case of amino acids  synthesis  
and all. so, this in in case of ye ast extract  they and because they can supply with the 
nucleotides and all, which can replace this phenomenon .  
So, because of this, so, this is actually a very benefici al phenomenon . So, once you  are 
adding some additional components or additional material, which can replace not only 
replace , which can actual ly boost this phenomenon this de novo synthesis in cell. De finitely it 
can boost the immunity and the anti-stress  mechanism of the cell itself. So, that is how the 
nucleotides are actually helpful. And these nucleotides can be supplied by using the yeast 
extract.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:02)   
 The fourth one that we  will be discussing today is the probiotics you know, what is 
probi otics ? it is like  a microbial feed  supplement, which helps in improving the intestinal 
microbial balance for any reared aqua tic species , forget about reared aquatic species any 
living organisms even we also used to have probiotics based on our doct or's pre scription 
when we have some irritations in our gut and also we have some problem with the digestion 
or anything. So, w e supplied with some probiotics .  
So, these are the microbial feed supplements which improve the intestinal microbial balance. 
So, that yo u have to remember about what is probiotics and  all how it what is the action what 
it actually does, it helps in the pr oduction of inhibitory compounds like the lactoferrin, 
lysozymes  and the bacteriocins and all , which can act again the against th e pathog ens, you 
know, what is pathogens, pathogenic microorganisms, if the organisms which are unwanted, 
which are the unw anted microorganisms, which somehow presents in the feed and somehow 
get into our system, so, these pathogens can cause the disease and all .  
So, we need to get rid of the pathogenic microorganisms, how we can do that, we can have 
some in hibitant , produce some  inhibitory compounds like lactoferrin, lysozyme, and 
bacteriocins, which can help us against fighting the pathogenic microorgani sms, not  only us, 
but the aquatic species as well. So, in this particular case, the probiotics are supplied in the  
for the base because of that  all. 
What are the other action what are the other involvement?  competition for the adhesion  sites 
and the essent ial nutr ients, inhibition of virulent gene expressions, disruption in quorum 
sensing, supply of essential nutrient s and enzymes and also improving the immune response 
in general. So, in gen eral, you know what is quorum sensing  out of all these things, I th ink 
quorum sensing is the one that you should, like, you know, know more in detail.  
Quorum sensing is like, you k now, kind of interacting mechanisms like way of 
communication in between the microbiota . In general,  the bacteria, they just to say in very 
grossly it  is a way of communication.  The microorganism,  the way of communication. So it  is 
like, you know, one path ogen came and they say, like, so we have a very perfect  environment 
here. 
Let us increase the productivity and we can have let  us go for the reproduct ion we can have a 
lot of reproduction we can  will capture the whole system and al l. So we will, they will also, , 
kind a communicate with other microorganism  and they will also come and settle there. So it  is like, I  am just giving you a very gros s it does  not go like this, they do  not talk like this 
there, there are some chemical compounds which are responsib le for that. Anyway, so this 
quorum sensing process can be disrupted by using the probiotics.  
So, other than that, it can supply the essenti al nutrie nts in and to improve the immune 
response definitely, because of the presence of this, and the different i nhibitory compounds a s 
I already mentioned . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:14 )  
 
Probiotics like lactobac illus species, Enterococcus, Pedi ococcus  or the bacil lus species, it can 
improve the nutrient utilization growth and the resistance to pathogenic microorganism  
bacteria in various aquatic species. Several probiotic strains have been observed to produce a 
digestive enzyme  which is also good see like it can , it is helping in producing some digestive 
enzymes , facilitating the efficient feed utilization and digestion in gilthead seabream larva , 
cyprinus carpio or the white shrimps and all  
So, for them it is beneficial in other sense also, because it is hel ping th em to produce the 
digestive enzymes. One of the main challenges of incorporating the probiotic  in aquafeed is 
the involvement of high temperature used to formulate their aquafeed . Once you go for high 
feed formation , remember we discuss about the pe llet fo rmation and all how we do all those 
things.  
In case of pellet , we go for high pressure high t emperature utilization , when we go for this 
high pressure high temperature utilization, what will happen ? it will reduce the activity of this probiotic com pound. But, there are some spore forming bacteria like bacillus species, because 
of their heat stabil ity, it can provide fairly good viability even after pelleting after the pellet is 
found this small pellets are formed, because they are going through this  extrus ion process 
which involves very high temperature high pressure process . 
Because of that still,  because of this environment of this heat and pressure, some kind of 
bacillus species can still survive this spore forming microorgan isms. They can still surv ive 
because of the making a specific type of shielding layer or over its body and it w ill still be 
prese nt in the pellet and it also possess  high resistance to  the gastric condition, h igh and 
gastric low pH condition and all these things . 
So the re also the y can easily sustain. So that can be used as probiotics in case of the pellet  
formatio n or where we  will be using very high pressure and high heat, high amount of high 
temperature.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:22 )  
 
So in conclusion, the most widely commerciali zed species used in aquafeed are 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae , or the baker ’s yeast  and torula yeast . Organic acids like lactic 
acid, acetic, citric, butyric, formic,  propionic , sorbic and malic  acid along with their salts can 
be used as acid ifiers  in animal f eed. Feed additives like pellet binders, preservatives like anti-
mold , antimicrobial p roperties, a compound and antioxidants can be used to improve the feed 
quality . Probiotics are liv e microbial feed supplements that improve the intestinal microbial 
balanc e of the reared  aquatic organisms  and all .  (Refer Slide Time: 29:00 )  
 
Takeaway mes sage from this lecture, you know the feed additives are use d to ensure proper 
ingestion,  digestion, absorption and the transportation of the dietary nutrients to the cell .  
Phytogenic compounds like , like it can exert the multiple effects on the aquatic sp ecies like 
stimulation of their appetite and the gastric juice, anti-microbial , anti-inflammatory  and 
antioxidant activities.  
Organic acids are used to improve the gut he alth and performance . Yeast are  used as a source 
of protein and  nitrogen sometimes an d also its  extracts can be used for other purposes 
probiotics, like lactobacillus , pediococcus, enterococcus,  bacillus species.  It can improve the 
nutrient utilization , growt h and the r esistance to pathogenic microorganisms for various 
aquatic species or t he species that you  are culturing in your systems.  (Refer Slide Time: 29:49 )  
 
So, I will continue about this feed additive  in the coming lecture as well.  So this  is the 
reference th at you can  take a picture you can Google it . It will give you much more  
information in very precise manner about this aquafeed  formulation and what are the 
information like different informations that you need.  
So that is it for today we  will discuss more in details about the different feed additives and all 
in the coming lecture. Thank you so much.  