Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick   
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur   
Lecture  21  
Topic  - Larval  Rearing  and Hatcheries  
Hello  everyone.  Welcome  to this NPTEL  online  certification  course  Advanced  Aquaculture  
Technology.  My name  is Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bowmick,  I am from  the Agriculture  Food  
Engineering  department  of IIT, Kharagpur.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:40)  
 
 
 
So, in this module,  this module  5, we will be discussing  about  the Technology  of Larval  
Rearing , Larval  Rear ing in the hatchery  in the first lecture  module  that lecture  material  that we 
will be discussing . The concepts  that will be covered  in this lecture  is like the hatchery  and its 
operation  the important  consideration  for hatchery  design.   
What  are the components  of hatchery , the broodstocks  unit, live food unit, larval  rearing  unit, 
wean ing unit, etc. I am discussing  each and every  units  and how what  are the design  
considerations  and all that we need  to think  about  we need  to discuss  about  like before  going  
for designing  a proper  aquaculture  farm,  the hatchery .  
So, in general  what  is hatchery , you know  what  is hatchery . It is a facility  for producing  the 
fish fingerlings  suitable  for stocking  in grow  out ponds,  so hatchery  is the place  where  we start 
from like say like from  the egg to the like even  before  like when  we take the brood stocks  and 
all, so from  we try to help them  to grow  the help them  to go forward  this fertilizations  and all, 
help them  to sorry  go for this like the eggs and all and at the end. So, we from  that stage  to the 
fingerling  stage  we take care of in hatchery . Then we the once  it is it reaches  the fingerling  
stage,  we take it out and we put it in the grow  out pond  to go for the further  mature,  we will 
wait for it to be mature d enough  for its marketable  stage.   
So, that we can harvest  it and we can simply  sell it in the market  or we can use it for other  
purposes . So, in general  hatchery  has a number  of a certain  number  of ponds for stocking  the 
brood fish, for prepared  them  for this spawning  activity . We have  a particular  number  of 
nursing  pond s, because  after this spawning  is done  this post-larval  stage  till the frying  stage  
that nurturing  period  is covered  in the nursin g pond,  then we go for this rearing pond  when  it 
reaches  the when  the aquatic  species  it reaches  the fry stage  and till the fingerling  stage,  we 
keep  them  there.   
So, it is like human  like us only like we like from  the bird like till the like certain  age, we are 
like child  and then we become  adult,  so, the moment  where  the adult  will let them  into the 
grow -out pond.  So, the moment  they reach  to the adult  stage  we will throw  them  in the grow -
out pond.  So, once  they are in the grow -out pond  then it is not a matter  of hatchery  then it is a 
completely  different  sectors,  so completely  different  ideal  like fundamentals  that we normally  
provide . So, that is the other  part of the designing  of farm.   
In this lecture  material , we will only be discussing  about  the hatchery . So, in hatchery  we do 
like spawning  the egg incubation,  hatching , rearing  hatchling  to post larval  stage  all these  
things  are happening  in this the hatchery  in like specially  in the brood stock  ponds  and all.  
So, this growth  stages  are highly  sensitive  and hence  larval  rearing  is a very crucial  and a 
difficult  state and this is why the design  of hatchery  should  be optimal  and very clean,  it has to 
be very how to say it has to properly  maintained , cleanliness  is one of the important  thing  and 
also the cheaper  the design  the better  the productivity , better  the how to say the economic  
greater .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  4:13)  
 
So, the operations  of, operations  in a hatchery,  the major  operation  that is carried  out in the 
hatchery  as we already  discussed  first, the broodstock  rearing  you collect  the broods tock,  which  
are like in a perfe ct shape  and perfect  desirable  body  mass  index  desirable  structural  integrity  
and all is there . So, we collect  those  broodstock  and we manage  them , we rear them  in the in 
our ponds . So, this is called  the broodstock  rearing  and all.  
Then we let them  come  to the rearing s once  they are coming  to the spawning  stage.  We put 
them  in a proper  spawning  container  with that we have  a proper  arrangements  for their 
spawning  activity  to take place  so that the eggs will start hatching  after a day or two depending  
upon  the aquatic  species  that we are culturing.   
Then it will go for the rearing s, larval  rearing,  then post larval  and once  it will reach  the 
fingerling  stage  we harvest  and trans port it to the into the grow -out ponds . So, most  important  
operation  in the hatchery  is the larval  rearing,  spawning  and hatching , stocking  larva , feeding  
and water  management .  
So, these  four are very important  points  that we need  to worry  about  when  we will be 
discussing , when  we will be designing  a hatchery , when  we will be operating  a hatchery  and 
these  are the operating  parameters  also we can call like say like water  management , feeding  
requirement  or the feeding  interval  or the feeding  capacity  that you have  to think  about  
depending  upon  the size. 
Because  in this stage  each day they will be multiplying , each day their body  mass  will be 
multiplying  in nature  like in certain  manifolds  like I am not talking  about  huge  number  but it 
is like it will go very fast it will grow  very fast that the early  stage  of development  of any 
animal  any organism  because  of that their feeding  requirement  will also vary like anything .  
So, and also their feeding  can be initially  you can in for the initial  day or you just cannot  just 
feed them  with the like dry pallets and all. No, it has to be initial  days their feeding  requirement  
is different  they cannot  have  those  kind of food which  are which  they cannot  digest  even  if they 
can even thy can  like it is not be of their use actually.  It will not help them  for the development . 
So, you need  to think about  what  type of feed you are giving , what  is the feeding  rate, what  is 
the feeding  capacity  all this feed conversion  ratio and all, all this you have  to think  about.  The 
stocking  density  is very important  what  is the stocking  density  of larva  that you are providing  
to your system  and based  on that you have to optimize  the system  and all. (Refer  Slide  Time:  7:02)  
 
So, what  is the significance  of larval  rearing  because  wild fry stocks  drastically  reduced  due to 
the overfishing , change  of coastal  environmental  condition , the pollution  in the freshwater  
sources  and all, because  of all these  reasons  so the wild fry stocks  are getting  lost so we need  
to have  hatchery , we need  to have  this we need  to have  more  and more  this kind of system  so 
to grow  our own like aquaculture  products .  
Wild population  obviously  it fluctuate  unpredictable  earnings  harvested  beyond  sustainable  
limits . So, that is why you could  just cannot  rely on wild production  and the most  often  there  
is no wild production  available  at this moment  like it is like I am not saying  no means  it is like 
0 amount  there  are ample  amount  but they are already  in a very extreme  deep  stage .  
So, we just do not go for it is better  to practice  as an engineering  point  of view,  it is better  to 
practice  to better  for us to practice  for sustainable  engineering  solutions  for growing  this 
biological  systems  for this living  organisms.  And it is doable  there  are ample  amount  of 
research  available , experts  available  on this field to just go and just do it. It is very much  
affordable  also. Another  thing  is like in case of wild catch,  it is wild fry stocks , they are 
uncertain  and unreliable  supply . So, you cannot  be 100 percent  assured  that you will get a 
certain  amount  of fry available  for your grow -out pond to have  certain  amount  of marketable  
products .  
So, for that the development  of larval  rearing  or the seed production  hatch  in the hatchery  seems  
like it will have  an impact  on it. Hatchery  production  ensures  the steady  state supply  of seed 
for the aquaculture  which  is like the major  input for the aquaculture  sector .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  8:59)  
 
So, what  are the consideration  for hatchery  design?  As I already  discussed,  when  we will be 
discussing  about  designing  or like developing  or constructing  of hatchery  there  are lot of 
technical  solutions  that has to offer  for the best guarantee  in terms  of the reliability,  ease of use, 
production  capacity,  hygienic  working  conditions  and the cost effectiveness.  These  are the five 
very basic  criteri a that has to be fulfilled,  is it?  
Why  reliability , because  you cannot  just go for designing  a hatchery  for a particular  aquatic  
species,  which  has like suppose  they needs  a certain  amount  of space  for that particular  stocking  
density,  but you are providing  less than that, so differently  they will be having  (())(9:50)  like 
first of all, they will they cannot  survive  because  of the requirement  of the environmental  point  
of view  because  say like say they need  high dissolve  oxygen  but you increase  the stocking  
density  like anything .  
So, they cannot  sustain  in that particular  situation . Second  thing,  they will have  a competition  
among  themselves  about  the feed,  they will not survive . So, there  are lot of things . Ease of use, 
production  capacity,  you have  to think  about  like what  is the production  capacity  and based  on 
that you have  to design  the hatchery  from  the beginning . So, you cannot  just first design  the 
hatchery  and then think  about  the what  will be the production  capacity  that is a very foolish 
design , foolish  ideology.  Hygienic  working  condition  that is very important,  because  unless  
until you have  a hygienic  working  condition,  there  is a chance  of very frequent  a disease  
outbreak  in your farming  product .  
So, the moment  you will have  a very frequent  disease  outbreak  what  will happen  it will reduce  
your econ omic  return  even  sometimes  if you are not lucky  enough  it can give you a huge  loss 
also for your systems  because these  are living  organisms . So, you just kind of play with it like 
there  is even  small  disease  outbreak  can cost you like for sure because  it will just completely  
lose your product .  
So, hygienic  working  condition  is very important  that we need  to rely we need  to think  about . 
Cost effectiveness  obviously  like you just we have  to design  it accordingly , so, that the our 
capital  cost or the even  recurring  or all non recurring  cost has to be has proper  and it is designed  
in such a way that it has a very low payback  period  and all so and also it will definitely  start 
giving  you return  after a couple  of month  or a couple  of years  depending  upon  the size of the 
farm  depe nding  upon  the species  that you are targeting  and all.  
In general , the size of the hatchery  must  be decided  prior  to the site selection , technical  or the 
financial  plan.  The factors  which  is deciding  the size of a hatchery  is like the main  fish species  
and the secondary  species . Yearly  targets , number  of fry or the size of the fry for each species . 
Origin  of egg, is it the internal  production  or some  other  sources  that you are collecting  the 
eggs from,  that is an important  factor , photoperiod  or the thermo  period  manipulation  to shift 
the reproductive  cycle s, marketing  aspects  like fish size and the season  for sales . So, these  five 
are the very important  factors  which  decides  the size of the hatchery .  
What  is photoperiod  and thermo period  manipulation , every  reproduct  cycling  or like every  
species  has its own comfort  range  for the amount  of sunlight  requirement , amount  of 
temperature  that it can grow  very easily . So, all these  things  are there . So, for how long suppose  
you are growing  a pond  in a some  polar  region  where  there  is like 24, like in a winter  season  
there  is like 24 hour of like continuous  night,  like it is like not 24 hours,  it is like couple  of 
months  of continuous  night  there  is no sunlight  at all.  
So, I am just giving  you an example , this is do not take it serious  like it is not just an example  
like in this case what  you got to do, you have  to design  your hatchery  in such a way so that you 
can kind of manipulate  the photo period  and you can utilize  either  by using  the artificial  sunlight  
by LED  lamps  and all these  things  or you just go for an obviously  a thermo period  manipulation  
for the to shift the reproductive  cycle  in such a way so, that the temperature  also you can 
maintain  and that particular  period  the hatchery,  the particular  period  of production  is enough  
for the temperature  that is aware  that is dwelling  that is available  there.  I mean  like that is there  
at that particular  time is enough  for the reproductive  cycle . So, you have  to do this kind of design  when  you are designing  you have  to think  about  this before  head  before  when  you start 
your farm.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:56)  
 
If you see this design,  it is like a very generalized  design,  it is a general  hatchery  layout . So, 
these  blue lines  are the weaning  units.  The one is the phyto  zooplankton  units.  A, the dark 
yellow  one, light yellow  one is the larval  rearing  units.  The green  one is the broodstock  unit, 
so these  four are the important  points.   
What  does that do? If you see the number  A, phyto zooplankton  unit, what  do you think,  why 
do we need  zooplankton  why do we need  phytoplankton ? This is nothing  but this is the leaving  
feed that will be available  for your hatchery  for your stream  hatchery  for suppose  you are doing  
for mud crab hatchery,  so you will be like these  are the this is the leaving  feed that you are 
culturing  in your hatchery  itself  which  is very important.   
You cannot  have  you cannot  supply  leaving  feed from  outside  source  because  it will take time 
and it is a highly  perishable  item. So, you will have  a high loss, you have  to design  your 
hatchery  such a way that you will provide  all the feed most  of them  at least by your hatchery  
itself  like in your hatchery  itself . So, this leaving  feed can be for the earliest  stage  of 
development,  it can be artemia  pond,  small  artemia  pond  or the brine  fishes  and all you can 
have  a phytoplankton  or zooplankton  small  units . So, that will be helpful  for your larva  for 
your as a feed for your larval  stage .  
So, first we have  this proper , this we call this female  in the broodstock  unit. So, they have  this 
unit. So, from  the broodstock  unit they will be properly  culture  properly  taken  care of and then 
from  there  the ones they will spawn  there  is proper  spawning  units  from  the spawning  units  it 
will come  to the larval  rearing  unit, in the larval  learning  unit once  it will reach  up to a fry stage  
then it will be taken  it will be transported  to the weaning  unit. So, it is like a huge  one where  
they can easily  sustain  they can they will grow  up to the fingerling  stage  and then they will be 
transported  to the grow -out ponds,  you got my point . So, that is how it works,  what  are the 
service  units  that it requires  in a hatchery , first of all the pumping  station .  
So, which  will take the water  does if it like a sea water  is necessary,  it will take the sea water  
from  the nearest  sea water  station  and from  there  it will take it to the your farm,  you have  to 
have  a laboratory  to, in a proper  laboratory  it can be any size like if you can see this long panel  
on the very top or in the right  side there  will be like say like door there  you can have  a small  
laboratory  and all or you can have  it outside  also you can see in the bottom  left also there  also 
you can have  the laboratory  to discuss  to do the research  on the amount  of food that is required  
based  on the size that you calculate .  
So, you can check  about  that disease  if they are having  any disease  or not you can have  
underwater  cameras  by which  you can do the behavioral  analysis  by which  you can identify  
that if your farming  product  is already catching  any disease  or not.  
So, there  are adverse  technologies  available  and all, so, which  you can read more  in the 
literature . So, I cannot  give all the details  in this lecture , I have  a very limited  time for all this. 
So, if you ask me I will give you more  details  in later like in my other  lecture  materials  or you 
can even  simply  Google  it to find more  in details.   
There  should  be room  for electricity  room , electricity  for feed storage , for offices  and all where  
we will be doing  all the official  formalities  and all, so all this has to be here. So, all these  units  
has to be there  when  you will be designing  a proper  hatchery  just so remember  these  points .  
So, also remember  this you this drawing  also will we are going  to discuss  more  in details  in 
coming  slides  about  this first blue weaning  unit, deep  blue photo  and zooplankton  unit, larval  
rearing  unit in between  then the broodstock  unit, how they are will be corrected  I will be 
discussing  soon .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  18:26)  
 
So, in case of broodstock  unit what  we do, we maintain  adequate  stock  of parent  fish to ensure  
that the timely  supply  of fertilized  egg of the best quali ty to the larval  rearing  sector . So, the 
broodstock  units  have  the facilities  placed  both outdoor  or maybe  the indoor , outdoor  facilities  
are mainly  used for long term stocking  purposes  and also for the quarantined  treatment.   
Indoor  facilities  are mainly  used for overwintering  or where  the severe  winter  conditions  could  
affect  the fish survival.  We can shift the reproduction  period  by manipu lation  of temperature  
and photo period  as we discussed  and also for the spawning  purpose,  we do not do spawning  in 
outdoor  tanks , we keep  it inside  we because  spawning  is a very sensitive  phenomena . So, we 
keep  it in the inside  is a very controlled  environment,  in the indoor  tanks .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:16 ) 
 
Then  the live food unit as we discussed  you remember  the live food unit it is like the deep  
yellow  one, the left bottom  side we discuss  in the design.  It is what  is his function , to grow  the 
rotifers, micro algae,  which  is like I said before  as a live good  for the fish larvae . The unit can 
have  a separate  sub-units , first the phytoplankton  and rotifer  pure strains  and the small  volume  
culture  for very beginning  of your culture  species  or the say like for your fish larva , for your 
shrimp  larva . Then  phytoplankton  in the rotifer  back  culture,  then rotifer  mass culture  and 
enrichment,  then artemia  nauplii  mass  production  or enrichment  and the laboratory  test.  
So, these  units  should  be there  in the live food unit where  from  there  you can taste and you can 
identify,  you can capture different  stages  of your live food and you just provide  it to your 
cultural  spaces . Hence,  in general  way the first three  sub units,  it should  be contiguous  to 
simplify  the working  routines  as we told you let the phytoplankton  rotifer  pure strains,  their 
back  culture  and their mass  culture.  This actually  these  three  different  steps  of the same  
production  process  actually,  we collect  it and we give it at different  stages  of our larval  rearing  
unit or cultural  spaces .  
They  should  be placed  very close  to the larval  rearing  unit to reduce  the transportation  distance  
because  it is a perishable  item,  you just catch  it, you give it as a feed, you do not or otherwise  
it will take a lot of distance,  definitely  it has to be stored  properly  in a how to say proper  ice 
tanks  or ice even  we just do not go for it, it is better  to not go for any kind of freezing  technology  
in this kind of small  live feeding  techniques.  Live feedings  we do not go for, it is to have  it 
even  it is if it is really  not possible  then go for it but prefer  not to go for any kind of preservation  
techniques  for or any freezing  techniques  for transporting  these  live feeds  for your food and 
all. It has to be live feed from  the name,  you can understand  it has to be live, why it has to be 
live because  most  of the cases  the larva  it will be very hard for them  to find out this date when  
I mean  like find out the pallets and like feed they will keep  on moving .  
So, the what  happened  is larva  they can sense  it and they can go and they can have  it. So, it is 
like additional  requirements  for them  to have  food.  That is why we go for this live food and 
all. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:51)  
 
Then there  comes  a larval  rearing  unit the light blue one that you remember  you saw. So, in 
this light larval  rearing  unit in general  it place  in a large  room  with the tanks  for the incubation,  
cleaning  and disinfection  facilit y and other  cold storage  for live food storage.  You can have  it 
if it is like a completely  different  a very far away.   
Larval  rearing  it requires  a very controlled  light condition,  you are kind of manipulating  the 
sunlight  the natural  sunlight  here,  larva  are harvested  by draining  the tanks  and thus proper  
drainage  must  be provided  under  screen  channels  under  the floor  with a slope  of at least two 
persons  should  be made  to get rid of the unwanted  mattress .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:35)  
 
And then this weaning  units,  where  it function  as a metamorphosed  fish can grow  after 45 days 
old, and they can grow  up to 2 to 3 gram  of size and it is an intermediate  step between  the 
culture  of small  delicate  post larva  and the much  stronger  juveniles.  In this weaning  units,  it is 
like a enlarge  form  of larval  rearing  units  already  its designed  can be as same  as that. Optimum  
water  circulation  is very much  important  for to provide  the ample  amount  of dissolved  oxygen  
and to avoid  any water  stratification  or the dead  zone  in this kind of system s.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  23:09)  
 
Here  comes  the system  again,  here comes  the design  again,  it is a generous  design,  just to give 
you an idea about , you do not go for it as the standard  it is not a standard  design,  you just I am 
giving  you just a conceptual  idea about  it. So, if you see in this kind of structure  in this kind of 
hatcher y design,  how they are interrelated , among  the units  and the system,  green  unit, the deep  
green,  it is what  we are doing , we are doing  the phytoplankton  or any micro  algae  production  
here.  Then  there  comes  this deep  yellow one on the maroon  there  will be producing  artemia,  
we can produce  the zooplankton  unit, from  there,  it will come  to the larval  rearing  units,  what  
is the larval  rearing  units,  this is like this light green  one.  
So, there  is a larval  rearing  units  and there  right  bottom,  it is like the green  one, deep  green  one 
again . So, it is like the broodstock  pond  from  where  it is the parent  pond s, parent  fishes,  they 
are ready  to spawn  and they actually  when  they spawn  that fishes  that spawning,  the optimizer  
is like spawning  tank or spawning  units . So, in this small  spawning  unit, we wait for a couple  
of hours or so, once  it will hatch  once the eggs are hatch ed, then we transfer  them  into the larval  
rearing  units.  From  there  it will go once  it will reach  to the fingerling  unit will go to the, I mean  
so, the fry stage  it will go to the weaning  unit whic h is like the blue one which  is in the top.  
So, all these  cases  the feed is has to be delivered  you see the feed if that is to be delivered  at 
each stage . Sometimes  feed can be delivered  in the larval  rearing  tank also. But most  of the 
cases , larval  rearing  tank are okay  with the feed comin g from  the live feed units  that is how 
they are connected  that is how when  you will be designing  you have  to think  about  all these  
things , all these  units  available  in your farm, available  in your hatchery.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:13)  
 
In a well designed  hatchery  it should  consider  proper  production  flow,  harmonious  distribution  
of systems  to facilitate  the work  like every  hour, increase  safety  and obviously  the hygienic  
condition  it reduces  it has to reduce  the construction  and the management  cost. These  are the 
important  parameters  that you have  to think before  you design  a hatchery . The most  important  
groups  of relationships  to be taken  into consideration  are those  related  to the production , 
systems  and the works.  Production  relationships  involves  the production  flow which  first 
comes  from  the live food unit then larval rearing  then the weaning  unit.  
System  relationships,  various  units  may share  the spaces  or facilities , what  is work  
relationships , between  the hatchery  systems  and the manpower  requirements . So, this 
production  relation , system  relation  and the work  relation  these  are these  management  terms  
that you have  to you can Google  it, you can search  for it, you can what  is this things  and how 
to develop  your knowledge  more  about  it and to, so once  you will be a technology  provider  for 
an aquaculture  sector,  or you will be having  your own aquaculture  farm . So, we will think  about  
all this relationships  better  and you can utilize  it in your design .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  26:33)   
 
So, in conclusion,  so, hatchery  it plays  a major  role in ensuring  the reliable  supply  of seed or 
the fingerlings  for the aquaculture  sectors  and the design  of the systems  must  be carried  out in 
such a way that the best possible  technical  solutions  are applied . So, it is really  doable  and there  
are like ample  amount  of research  available,  ample  amount  of facilities  available  papers 
available,  all this kind of a and I will discuss  more  in the coming  lecture  also like about  the 
design  and construction  of hatchery,  but I hope  you will, you have  already  understood  and the 
importance  of the larval  rearing  and why the hatchery  is very important  at this stage  and why 
in aquaculture  sectors  hatchery  is one of the major  components .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  27:26)   
 
So, the larval  rearing  is in general  is a crucial  operations  which  governs  the availability  of most  
important  input  in aquaculture  that is the fish seed.  Rearing  of fish larva is a challenging  part 
of fish culture  because  of larvae’s  are mostly  they are sensitive  to the water  quality,  they have  
a very high nutritional  requirement.  And they require  the use of live feed I told you live feed 
because  they are in larval  stage,  they are all these  sensory  systems  are not as established  as 
once  they reach  the juvenile  stage  or once  they reach  the fingerling  or the adult  stage .  
So, because  of that, the live feed are more  useful,  they can easily  identify  because  of their 
locomotion  and they can go and have  it. Then also the nutritional  requirement,  because  they 
are in their early  stage  of development,  they need s a very high nutrition  and proper  diet has to 
be maintained  for them  to grow.  And also they are very sensitive  to the water  quality  as I 
already  discussed  because  even  if only certain  very minimal  changes  in the water  quality , so, 
like only the pH is changed.  Because  of that for us, it is like it does not matter  like if an increase  
like from  7 to 6 or 5.5.  
But for larva  it will happen  it will affect  a lot because  they are very sensitive  their overall  shield  
like the skin is like the body is very much  sensitive  to even  minor environmental  changes.  That 
is why we need  to think  about  the water  quality  and all these  things  as well.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  28:51)  
 
 
So, these  are the references  from  which  I have  taken  the information ’s and you can go and 
check  those  papers . So, if you go through  it, you will get a more  knowledge  about  how this 
how these  things  are happening . In general , so, thank  you so much.  We will discuss  more  details  
about  the design  of hatcheries  in coming  lecture , see you, bye.  
