Advanced  Agriculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture  25 
Maintenance  of Optimum  Conditions  
Hello  everyone,  welcome  to the last lecture material  of the module  5, Technology  of Larval  
Rearing.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:33)  
 
I am Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  from  the Depa rtment  of Agriculture  and Food  
Engineering  of IIT Kharagpur .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:38)  
 
So, in this particular  lecture,  I will be discussing  about  the parameters  which  includes  the 
hatchery  operation,  the maintenance  of hatchery , the basic  rules  in hatchery  operation,  the 
measures  that is to be taken  before  and after filling  tank and overall  maintenance  of the rearing  
condition s.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:57)  
 
As we know  hatchery  to have , in order to have  a quality  amount  of seed, it is essential  to set 
up a hatchery  system  with a suitable  technology.  So, we discussed  about  the type of hatcheries  
how different  nodes  of hatchery  and different  parts  of hatchery  and last two, last couple  of 
lectures.   
So, in this particular  lecture  material  I will be discussing  about  the optimal  conditions  for each.  
So, in general  the efficient  operation  of hatchery  it depends  on a number  of factors.  So, the 
factors  includes  the especially  if we talk about  the water  source,  it includes  the temperature,  
suspended  solid , dissolved  gases, pH, mineral  content  and the potential  danger  of toxic  
chemicals  or the toxic  metals  in general .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:45 )  
 
So, how these  different  parameters  are influenced , how these  parameter  are influencin g the our 
farming  product  I will tell you in a bit. So in general,  if we talk about  the ideal  source of water  
quality  either  it be fresh  water,  sea water , sinking  wells  at different  depths  are the best source  
to be considered  for, like whenever  we will be designing  your farm  it would  be better  to have  
can find a sinking  well near to your farm  area and that will be the best source  of collection  of 
water  in general .  
Tap water  can be used,  but in general  and tap water  when  we municipality  when  water  
treatment  system  they supply  the tap water , they supply  the water  for like regular  purposes.  So, 
they add with the chlorine . So, there  is a chance s of presence  of residual  chlorine.  So, in order  
to get rid of the residual  chlorine  what  you need  to do. You have  to keep  on, you have  to 
vigorously  aerate  it for 24 to 48 hours.   
So, then only you will be able to get rid of the residual  chlorine  concentration  chlorine  content  
from  the tap water.  If the fresh  surface  water  is you say like from any river  bodies  and all, so 
in that case gravel  or sand mud filters  are to be used preferably . For both seawater  and the 
freshwater  it should  have  a pH range  of around  7 to 8, temperature  of around  28 to 31 and 
because  of sea water,  the salinity  should  be around  28 to 34 ppt.  
In general  hatchery  intake,  the water  should  not have  should  not have  levels  of nitrite  or nitrate  
concentrations  of higher  than 0.1 PPM  and 20 PPM  respectively.  So, in general,  the pollution  
free water  like pollutants  free water  with a low iron and manganese  called  levels  are 
recommended.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:34)  
 
If we talk about  the temperature,  the most  important  factor  which  affects  the growth  and the 
development  of fish in general,  the metabolic  rates  can go up with increase  in temperature.  So 
many  biological  processes  like spawning,  egg hatching  and egg hatching,  etc, they need  a 
certain  amount  of temp,  certain  temperature  because  they in general  spawnin g and hatching  in 
that case,  we are dealing  with very how to say they are very sensitive , those  organisms  that we 
are dealing  with,  they are very sensitive  in nature.   
So even  if certain  amount  of because  they are in their very early  stage  of development,  because  
of that certain  level,  changes  in the temperature  or any kind of abrupt  environmental  conditions  
can highly  non beneficial  like highly  disruptive  for the growth  of those  living  beings.   
So that is why, that is why temperature  is another , is really  a important  parameter  but it actually  
depends  upon  the species  to species  and the place  where  you are culturing  and how we can 
optimize  the tempe rature  in your place  like if it is a temperate  region,  if it equator  (())(4:38) 
regions  depending  upon  the type of place  even  the altitude  also based  on the altitude  also the 
temperature  varies.  So, based  on that you have  to design  your farm to make  it in optimal  range  
especially  in the larval  range  better  to keep  it below  30 degrees Celsius  so like around  30 
degrees  celsius.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  04:49)  
 
Photoperiod  which  is another  significant  factor  that induces  a sexual , a sexual  maturation  and 
the spawning.  So, you have  to do a properly  manipula te the photo period  which  can like to in 
order  to go for the natural  spawning  and natural  spawning  of your culture  species . The greatest  
advantage  of the alternating  altering  spawning  time is like I will build  up the fry throughout  
the year.   
So, in general  the availability  of prize  vary season  (())(5:23) specific  most  of the in case of 
most  of the species. So, what  happens  so, if you can alter like if you can make  it in natural  like 
I mean  like artificial  environment  like say like in a in a polyhouse  in a greenhouse  in artificial  
environment  you can mimic  the natural  condition  of favorable  season.   
So, you can get the fry throughout  the year. So, that is how we actually  go for this artificial  
propagation  methods  and artificial  this go for this design  of different  polyhouse  with the control  
environment  and all, so to mimic  the favorable  season  for our for proper  availability  of fry 
throughout  the year.   
Maintenance  of hatchery  in general  it involves  the intensive  care of optimal  rearing  conditions  
to, first of all maintain  the good  quality  water  which  is like the most  important  factor . Other 
than that cleaning  and disinfection  of tanks  before  utilizing  the tank for any purposes  you have  
how to clean  it properly,  disinfect  it properly  using  different  disinfection s, disinfecting  agents,  
frequent  clearing  and cleaning  of tank bottom  is very important  otherwise  there is a chances  of 
obnoxious  gas and obnoxious  parasites  or like I would  say like different  kinds  of pathogen  
concentration  can also be generation  can also be possible .  
Hatchery  equipment  not to be used outside  because  if you are preparing  it if you are utilizing  
it outside  the equipments  which  are hatchery  equipments , you are utilizing  it outside  your say 
like polyhouse  or control  environment,  you it is susceptible  to different  kind of pathogens  or 
different  kind of unwanted  microorganisms  or foreign  microorganisms  to be in general .  
They  can be highly detrimental  they can be predited , they can be disease  causing , they can be 
different  multifaceted  problems  that it can it can bring , so that is why it is better  to not to put 
them  hatchery  equipments  outside  the hatchery  control  environment.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  07:20)  
 
In general  the basic  rules  of hatchery  operation  we have  to use the proper  protective  clothing  
and working  attire.  Drinking  and eating  should  not be allowed . Avoid the contact  of equipment  
unless  necessary.  And,  especially  you can wear  the gloves  and proper  preventive  measures . It 
should  be operated  by the authorized  personnel  only and always  begin  with a clean  empty  tank 
and equipment.  So to so in order  to get rid of any possibility  of cross  contamination.   
Disinfection  with the chlorine  followed  by rinsing  with the clean  water  is important  and even  
there  is, if there  is a chance  of having  when  you clean  it with a disinfect ants like chlorine,  it is 
better  to after you clean  it, rinse  it with a clean  water  you put some  water  and you can add it 
for like a couple  of hours , say like one day or so, in order  to make  sure that there  is no residual  
chlorine  left in your system  itself.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  08:13)  
 
 
What  are the measures  while  filling  the empty  tanks ? First of all, temporarily  remove  the 
standpipes  and overflow  regulating  pipes , you remember  like standpipes  and overflowing  
regulating  pipeline.  So, these  are stand pipes  and this is the you can see the red line, red, the 
first red, the left side it is indicated  showing  the overflow  regulation  or regulating  pipes  and 
the right  side if you see the standpipe s which , how it looks  like in a typical  tank.   
So temporarily  you have  to, in order  to fill the empty  tank first you have  to remove the 
standpipes  and overflow  regulating  pipes  and water  level  inside  and outside  the small  tanks  
should  be almost  the same  and then you can use the, you definitely  should  use the filtered  water  
depending  upon  the source  of water  you can go for different  regulations  also.  
After  filling  the tank,  you switch  on all the devices  like pumps,  aerator s, heaters  etc and plug 
in the standpipe  and put back  the overflow  regulating  pipes . Check  the water  flow into the filter  
box daily  and ensure  the strong  aeration  in big tanks,  biofilters  and in gentle  aeration  in the 
rearing  tank is always  being  placed , taking  place.  Because  otherwise  dissolvable  oxygen  if it 
goes down  it can be detrimental  for your target  species , for your culture  species.   
Sensor  of control  unit free floating in a rearing  tank separated  from  a main  heater.  So, the all 
the sensor  should  be in the rearing  time that you are installed  to go for day wise or like real 
time monitoring  of your system  it has to be far away  from  the main  heater  line. So, see that is 
how it looks  like this overflow  regulating  pipe and the standpipe  inside  as I already  showed.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  9:52)  
 
So, water  circulation . How the water  circulation  should  be control led? The pump  should  be 
should,  the pumps  should  not be the, should  not be pumping  against  the closed  ball, close d ball 
valves.  Definitely  you have  to make  sure that all the valves  are open  and so that how you can 
ensure  it. So, you can check  the arrow  sign over the this valves  and this all this close d ball 
valves .  
So it, because  the pump  it will be damage (())(10:19) , it is very dangerous  it can cause  severe  
damage  to your pumping  system  if the valves  are closed  and you switch  on the pump.  So, you 
have  to make  sure the valves  are open  all the time and flow through  the bio-filter  may need  
some  adjustment  with time because  bio-filter  when  you design  a bio-filter , it has its own 
retention  time, you have  to get, you have  to make  sure the water  which  is flowing  into the bio 
filter  it will stay there  for a certain  period  of time for the microbial  action  to take place . You 
know  the purpose  of bio filter , right ? Why we need  bio-filter ? First of all, say like there  is 
aquaculture  tank, the wastewater  is coming  out of aquaculture  tank which  contains  a huge  
amount  of ammonia  and all.  
Ammonia  rich waste  water,  that ammonia  rich waste water  it comes  to the bio-filter . In the bio-
filter  what  we do in bio-filter  we put different  kind of media s and for a favorable  condition  to 
grow  the nitrifying  bacteria  and also we provide  aeration  because  it needs  oxygen.   
So, the nitrifying  bacteria  which  is growing  inside  your bio-filter  it will consume  the ammonia  
rich waste  water  like ammonia  and it will convert  it to nitrate  or nitrite  and if it is possibl e there  
is like a further  anoxic  system  you can develop  that can further  utilized  this nitrite  and nitrate  
and convert  it to di-nitrogen  gas by using  the denitrifying  microorganisms  in anoxic  conditions .  
So, that is how the bio-filter  works,  but for bio filter, in the bio-filter  this nitrifying  bacteria  
need  some  time to accumulate  those  ammonia.  So, for that it may take couple  of hours  a couple  
of days of time.  So, there  is you have  to do the calculation,  there  is specific  design  
considerations  you can google  it you can find it out there.  And I am also like, go ahead  with 
some  further  lecture  series  among  specifically  for wastewater  treatment.   
So in there,  if you see in bio-filter , so, this time that retention  time that we call has to be 
maintained.  So, based  on that your water  circulation  has to be figured  out you have  to figure  
out that the water  flow should  not be more  than that particular  flow rate that and that flow rate, 
which  is actually  maintaining  a particular  amount  of retention  time inside  the bio-filter .  
So, suppose  you have  a flow rate of say, like 1 liter per hour.  So, if you have  a flow rate of 1 
liter per hour.  And, suppose  your tank is the size of 1 liter, so what  do you think  how many , 
for how long the water  will stay inside  your tank?  1 hour. But suppose  your tank,  the bio tank 
needs  at least four hour of retention  time.   
So what  you can do, either  you have  to reduce  the flow rate to at least 0.25 liter per hour.  So 
that in your bio tank, in your bio-filter , which  is the 1 liter of size, the water  can stay for at least 
4 hours  so that all the pollutants  can be well utilized  by the nitrifying  organisms,  or you can 
increase  the size of the bio-filter  like say 4 liters.  So, I am just giving  you an example  just 
random  examples  just to make  you understand  how it how it looks  like okay,  how the bio-filter  
actually  works  here. And so, it should  be gentle  or slow  to allow  the nitrification  as I already  
mentioned.   Aeration  is very important , well adjusted  serves  as a life guard  for welfare  of larva e in rearing  
tanks . Enriching  the water  in big tanks  with oxygen  with atmosphere  is very important  and 
strong  aeration  may be used in big tanks  and since  the larva e, the larva e or in the small  tank 
and gentle  aeration  is recommended  in the rearing  tanks , but aeration  is very important  at each 
and every  step you have  to provide  aeration  because  they are living  organisms  mostly  live in 
aerobic  condition  they need  oxygen  to breathe.   
So, it is in that dissolved  oxygen , dissolved  oxygen , in a form  of dissolved  oxygen  in the water.  
So you have  to provide  the dissolved  oxygen  time to time. And, how we can provide  it? By 
using  aerator,  so what  aerator  will do? Aerator  will help to dissolve  oxygen  from  atmosphere  
to water.  So, that is that is the basic  fundamental , basic  fundamentals  of aerators  like in general , 
there  are different  types  of aerators , there  are different  ways  of using  it. So in general  the aerator  
is used to enrich  the oxygen  concentration  or in the dissolved  oxygen  concentration  in the water  
by from  the air by using  the diffusion  phenomenon .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:38)  
 
Ilumination  is very important  as I mentioned  already  like the proper  illumiation  is important  
because  indoor  hatcheries  and specifically  there  is no dayli ght available  in general  we would  
not be to go for this in house  polly , inside  polly houses  and all. Fish larva e are visual  feeder  do 
not feed only when  there  is sufficient  light is available.  In general,  they are the visual  feeder , 
fish larvae.  They have  all the other  sensory  parts  are not sufficient  enough  for them  to go and 
catch  their target.  
So that is why they have  to have  proper  illumination  available  for their feed to have  and also 
the feed has to be in living  condition  like we go for live fish, live feed and all. The day night  
rhythm  we call it D N, D N rhythm  or like which  is like in hours  in light and darkness,  it is 
very important . Like saying  in case of tilapia  fish. If you are hatchering,  if you are reared it 
inside  the hatchery,  this day night  rhythm  has to be 12 to 12 which  is actually  mimicking  the 
natural  environment  outside  the for them  to grow  and which  is actually  recommended . And 
this rhythm  should  be adjusted  using  the automated  timer  so, you do not have  to do it by 
yourself.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:44)  
 
Maintenance  of rearing  condition  based  on the requirement  maintenance  is carried  out and 
various  scale,  you can go for daily  maintenance  of your hatchery  system,  you have  to check  
the running  condition  of all the devices , pumps,  aerators  all the running  devices  and with the 
moving  parts . Check  the pumps  for clean  entrance  you can check  the filters  if they are properly  
working  and or otherwise  it can choke  if the larger  particles  can come  into the pump  and it can 
choke  the pump,  it can disrupt  the pumping  the working  mechanism  of the pump.   
The daily  monitoring  of the water  quality  parameter  utmost  important  you have  to know  that 
what  is the dissolved  oxygen  concentration , what  is the pH, what  is the temperature , what  is 
the ammonium  nitrogen,  what  is the nitrite  nitrogen , what  is the nitrate  nitrogen.  So, these  are 
a couple  of examples  that I am just giving  you which  are very important  water  quality  
parameters  that you have  to monitor  it daily  basis  if possible  in real time basis.   
What  do I mean  by real time basis , means  every time, each and every  time it has to be, there  
should  be a sensor  placed  in a in a deep in the water  and it will give you the real time values  
every  time.  So, whenever  you want  to seek for the information  about  these  parameters,  you can 
go and check  the monitors  and it will give you the information  about  the real time data available  
for those  at that particular  moment  of time.  
Cleaning  of rearing tanks  is very important  time to time and it is actually  in daily basis  you 
have  to do it, adjust the water  flow as per the required  oxygen  level  and plan water  exchange  
based  on the ammonium  level  which  is very important  you can go for either  water  exchange  
you can go for either  recent  recirculatory  aquaculture  system  where  you can use the bio filters  
and all. 
However,  based  on the target  ammonium  level,  you can, up and down  this flow rate and daily  
monitoring.  That is why daily  monitoring  is important.  If suppose  in particular  day ammonium  
level  is very high and you are putting  it in the same  flow rate in the bio-filter . So bio filter  will 
be in shock,  they will not sustain  or it may sustain  up to a certain  level  but it will be they will 
be in shock  condition  because  it is more  like all of a sudden  if you had like food for like three  
days you cannot  have  it.  
So your whole  system  will be in disrupt , system  will be disrupted.  So that is the same  thing.  So 
that is why you have  to practice  a proper  feeding  results  also because  the feeding  is also another  
factor  which  actually  can cause  higher  level  of ammonia  in the wastewater  because  uneaten , 
uneaten  feed is the major  source  of one of the major  source  of high nitrogen  rich wastewater  
generated  in your farm.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  18:29)  
 
Frequent  maintenance  measures  you have  to clean  the blue foam  mat inside  the filter  box, it 
can be blue, it can be any color  in general  this filter  box has to be cleaned  properly,  you have 
to do the partial  water  exchange  depending  upon  the bio-filter  efficiency  and the water  
condition , in this water  condition  mean s the outlet  water  from  the bio-filter  and the inlet water  
from  the bio-filter  both because  based  on that, you have  to go for partial  water  filtration  
sometimes  because  sometimes  ammonia  level  rich say like very high for say like very low.  
So, in both of the cases  the bio-filter  will not solve  the purpose.  So, you have  to, you have  to 
ready  with some  alternate  or some  alternate  mechanism  or alternate  funda,  so how we can get 
rid of ammonia , excess  ammonia  or how we can say it is like it is like very diluted.  So, in that 
case,  you can just surpass  it through  the bio-filter  because  bio filter  will not, it does not make  
sense.   
So, it because  in that case, as the ammonia  level  is very low. So it will increase  the retention  
time or it will decrease  the retention  time like anything . So, like depending  upon  the, depending  
upon  the amount  of ammonia.  So this increment  and decrement  in the retention  time all of a 
sudden  in the system,  if it like fluctuate  more  than a sustain  certain  threshold  level,  it is 
detrimental  for your bio-filter  because  it will wash  out, it will wash out the if it is like very fast 
very.   
If you, all of a sudden  reduce  or reduce  the reduction,  retention  time like anything  what  will 
happen , it can because  of that the flow rate should  have  to be increased  because  the ammonia  
level  is low and because  of that what  will happen  it will because  of the higher  flow rate it will 
just flush  out all, flush  out all the important  nitrifying  organisms  that was, that is being  grown  
slowly  in your bio reactor.  So, just give you an example.  So, that is how it works.  So, you have  
to make  sure that the water  condition  you have  to check  the water  condition  based  on that you 
have  to go for this maintenance  measures.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:27)  
 
If I talk about  the individual  maintenance  measures,  complete  draining  and cleaning  of tank,  
continuous  use of tank if complete  draining  is not possible . Cleaning  and disinfection  of all the 
equipments  and better  to clean  it with the clean  water  I mean  like a bio-filter  do not use chlorine  
because  chlorine  is a disinfectant,  it has a disinfectant  capacity,  it will cause  different  reactive  
oxygen  species  to generate  in the water  which  is detrimental  for your nitrifying  organisms  or 
the helpful  organisms  present . So, do not clean  the bio-filter  with the chlorine.  Tank  
disinfection  is important,  turn on, you turn on the pump  heater  and aerator,  etc when  tanks  are 
filled .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:07)  
 
So, this is the recommended  water  quality  paramete rs of various  species,  the baitfish, catfish  
and their temperature  range,  dissolved  oxygen  pH you can take a picture  of it for your, for your 
information.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:24)  
 
So, in general,  when  we talk about  this hatcheries  and all we discussed  for the last couple  of 
lectures,  how to design  a hatchery , what  are the site selection  criteria , what  is the parameters  
that we need  to think , we need  to really  worry  about , what  are the engineering  considerations  
are involved  here.   
So in general,  clean  and well arranged  hatchery  is considered  as a key to success  for your farm  
and you have  to maintain  the intensive  care you have  to maintain  a proper  optimal  rearing 
condition  for intensive  care of your product  or culture  species.  And on the other  hand,  
maintaining  all the equipment's  and tanks  in a good  condition  is like very important  for in order  
to make  sure that the hatchery  has a long enough  life for its survival.  Therefore,  it is higher  
benefit  and for giving  the higher  economic  benefit  plus it will have  a higher  shelf  life as well.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:21)  
 
So the takeaway  message,  well maintained  hatchery  ensures  a healthy  disease  free environment  
for the fry production  which  is very important  and that is why we normally  go for designing  
and developing  or the construction  of the hatcheries  in general . It involves  the maintaining  of 
operating  condition  as well as the equipment  used for the larva l rearing and all.  
So, in general  in this couple  of lectures  we discussed  how hatcheri es are like how this design  
of hatchery  and the proper  engineering  concept  is mandatory  for, it is very much  essential  when  
you go for designing  of the hatchery.  So there  is further  details  that we can go ahead  but we 
can think  of it but because  of the time constraint  I cannot  go ahead  with the further  in detail  
designing  of hatcheries  and all if you are interested  definitely  you can contact  me I will 
definitely  can help you out with it and how to design  and what  are the engineering  consideration  
and what  are the, what  are the different  aspects  that involves  with design  and development  of 
a proper  hatchery  farm.  
So, but we have  a good enough  knowledge  about  the carp hatchery , how to design  carp 
hatchery,  prawn  and shrimp  hatchery  as till (())(23:41 ) already  and so very good.  So we can 
utilize  this and we can think  about  how we can utilize  it for, in future.   
Anyway,  so in the coming  module,  I will be discussing  about  the aquafic  technology,  how the 
different  kind of aquatic  feeds  are formulated  and how it is being  utilized  in general  for 
aquaculture  purposes.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:07)  
 
So these  are the references  that you should , you can take a picture , you can Google  it and it 
will be very much  helpful  for you to know  further  about  how it works.  So that is it for now.  So 
see you in the next module.  Thank  you. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:21)  
 
