Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick   
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur   
Lecture  23  
Topic  - Design  of Prawn  Hatchery  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:31)  
 
 
Hello  everyone,  welcome  to the third  lecture  of module  5. Technology  of larval  rearing , my 
name  is Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  from the Department  of Agriculture  and Food  
Engineering,  IIT Kharagpur.  So, in this particul ar lecture,  the concepts  that I will be covering  
is how to when  we will be designing  a prawn  hatchery.  What  are the different  site selection  
criteria  that we need  to follow . The hatchery  facilities  and equipment , the compon ents of prawn  
hatchery,  the spawn er and the broodstock  transport,  larval  rearing,  post larval  rearing and 
harvest , packing  and transport  so it is like from  its initial  stage  to the execution  stage  how 
hatchery  design  has to be proper  has to be designed  and all.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  1:08)  
 
So, when  we design  a pond  hatchery  it in general  development  of prawn  industry  it really  
depends  on the steady  supply  of fry because  natural  limited  source  of fry is like it will like we 
does that is one of the major  reason  why we need  to go for designing  a proper  hatcherie s 
because  the natural  supply  of price  like limited  and most  of its it disrupts  the wild population  
around  because  of that we need  to improve  the prawn  hatchery  techniques  which  will require  
to increase  the fry production  which  is one of the major  reasons .  
What are the important  factors  that need  to be considered  for designing  a farm hatchery  as like 
the carp hatchery  it is almost the same  but there are certain  changes  that I will be discussing  in 
coming  slides.  First of all the site selection  the hatchery  facilities  and equipment  that we will 
be designing , the knowledge  of prawn  larval  stages , the spawner  and the broodstock  collection  
and transport  techniques,  larval  rearing  techniques,  post larval  rearing techniques  and also the 
fry harvest  packing  and transport  techniques . So, these  are the very important  operating  
parameters  and techniques  that we need  to follow  we need  to like properly  consider  before  we 
design  a prawn  hatchery .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  2:28)  
 
In terms  of site selection,  I do not want  to discuss  more  details  because  we already discussed  
in the last lecture  if you remember  about  the carp hatchery,  so, there  are also major  of them  
those  factors  are actually  still like the same  for the prawn  hatchery  as well.  Other  than that, the 
spawner  source  is important , location  is important  because  in case of prawn  hatch  in case of 
carp,  you can do it in inland  water  bodies  as well near to the inland  water bodies  as well but in 
case prawn  or shrimp , you have  to make  it as near to the coastal  region  or otherwise,  you have  
to mimic  the seawater  which  is actually  doable  nowadays  people  are doing  in different  
countries,  but still it requires  a huge  amount  of chemical  demand  and all.  
And so, the location  is very important , the climate  is very important , sea water  quality  that you 
are supplying . Depending  upon  the though  they shrimp  and these  prawn s and shrimps  they can 
sustain  the wide  range  of salinity , but still depending  upon  the target  spaces,  it can be it is better  
to be in as specific  as possible  for them  to not to have any stress  in any physical  stress  in their 
system  in their body.  So, sea water  quality  has to be maintained  as less in our range  as possible , 
availability  of electric  power  definitely  very important  accessibility  and the fresh  water  supply .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:55)  
 
When we go for the facilities  and designing  of a equipments  of hatcheries,  if you see the 
structure  if you see this drawing  so on the left hand  side if you see in the left hand  side bottom  
is the working  area with the proper  larval  tanks  are being  placed  in a regular  manner  and at the 
top you will see the algal  tank so algal  tank is for what , algal  tank is like a feeding tank for 
them,  other  than algal  tank sometimes  you provide  there  some  like artemia  tanks  also small  
artemia  production  units  also, some  rotifers  unit also. So, what  these  things  do these  rotifers,  
this Artemia  is like which  we call brine  shrimps  also this algae  they are actually  feed for your 
target  crop.   
So, that feed this live feed also be you need  to be need  to farm  in your hatchery  as well.  So, 
that can be done  you see the design  in the leftmost  figure  in its top there  you can you provide  
it with this kind of live feed installation  systems  and all, then there  comes  this larval  tank in 
this larval  tank you see like it is a pretty  huge  (())(5:16)  sized  in structure.  So, here the from  
the post larval  stage  to fry stage  we try to rear them  and from  larval  tank once  it is one is once  
it reaches  to the fry stage  then it is transported  to the rearing  units  or the different  rearing  units  
and in the rearing units  we can go ahead  with the further  production .  
On the same  hand , if you see on the post-larva l tanks,  we call it a rearing unit or a post-larval  
tanks , if you see in the right  side bottom  there  is a dotted  circle.  So, these  are like five tonne  
brood stock  tank that is optional,  because  it can be of any design  and we already discussed  in 
the earlier  discussion  earlier  lecture  material  that how broodstock  for tank has to be designed , 
what  are the considerations  and all. So, what  it is done  what  is done  in the broodstock  tank,  we 
have  the proper  healthy  breeders  we have  the breeders  or healthy  individuals  or healthy , I would  
say like parent  fishe s we collect  them  we nurture  them  in a proper  manner  in a broodstock  with 
a very high efficiency  so that ones they will reach  to their spawning  stage.   
So, they will spawn  and they will this is a very important  structural  design  is very important  
when  we go for designing  a farm  prawn  hatchery  especially,  the layout  is very important  
because  every  each and every  structure,  each and every  farm, I mean  like farming  inputs  and 
farming  outputs  has to be designed  in such a way so it will take as less footprint  as possible.  I 
am talking about  in terms  of space,  I am talking  about  in terms  of transportation  and all. So, 
suppose  you have  a feeding  unit, which  is like very far from  the broodstock  unit. So, your 
broodstock  unit will be at stake  because  it has to provide  I am just giving  an example.  So, 
suppose  you need  to provide  aeration al line.  
So, suppose  you need  to provide  aeration al line or say like any feeding  continuous  feeder that 
is available  that is that you are providing  to your post larval  tanks  but suppose  is electrical  line 
is far away  or suppose  the tank that you have  the design  is very important  each and every  aspect  
of design  is very important  where  you are where  the electrical  connections  will be there  where  
what  type of aerators  has to be provided  the aeration  efficiency  will reduce  if you have  a central  
aerator  line say like Central aerator  and from  there  you are supplying  the aeration  to the 
different  due through  the conduit  system  to different  tanks,  the farther  aeration  tank it is the 
less the efficiency  of the aeration  unit it will be so, just to give you an example  like how why 
these  small  things  matters .  
So, how you have  to when  you design  you have  to design  all the things  very precious  very 
cautiously.  Another  important  thing  is like the renewable  energy  source,  you have  to think  
about  the renewable  energy  source  when  we will be designing  a hatchery  like you have  to 
provide  you with a solar  roofing  provided  with a geothermal  energy  to maintain  a certain  
temperature  in your system.  So, you can provide  it with the so, have  a proper  say like digester  
proper  digester  you can provide  or where  all your bio waste  can be thrown  on that from  there  
the gas digested  this biogas  can be generated  that can be utilized  for different  purposes  as well.   
So, I am just giving  an example  of when  you will design  when  you will design  a hatchery  
facilities  and equipment  you have  to think  about  all these  factors . This is not a standard  design,  
this is only to give you a certain  perspective  of how it looks  like. So, when  you will be designing  
depending  upon  the size of the area, land layout  like the soil properties,  the sloping  
characteristics , the number  of the amount  of culture  that you required , the amount  of tank that 
you need  to design.  So, based  on all these  parameter s you will go and design  your farm.  So, it depends  with the time to time.  So, just I want  to make  sure that you will understand  the 
basic  amenities  that it requires  and basic  parameters  that it involves  that it depends  on. The 
components  if you see the larval  and post-larva l tanks,  algal  culture  tanks,  air supply  line, sea 
water  supply  line and the building  and equipment,  see water  supply  is another important  
parameters  that I will be discussi ng in coming  slides  which  have  not been  discussed  yet.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  9:47)  
 
So, when  we go for larval or the post-larval  tanks  in general,  the tank capacity  has to be around  
like 1 to 20 tonnes  depending  upon  the size of the farm. For economic  operation,  water  holding  
capacity  of larval  rearing tank has to be in between  3 to 5 tonnes  with a depth  of at least 1 meter  
do not make  it very deep,  not more  than say like 1.2, 1.3 meters,  around  1 meters  is okay . Post-
larval  rearing  tanks  are also around  1 meter  with a capacity  of around  6 to 10 tonnes  are 
expected.  In general  say like in a 3 tonne  of larval  rearing  tank can hold around  1 lakh 50 to 
around  3 lakh naupliis . In general  it is prawn  naupliis.   
Material  of construction  concrete,  fiberglass,  marine plywood,  bamboo  or wooden  slats with a 
plastic  linings  anything  like which  is depending  upon  the size and depending  upon  the capacity  
and the economic  how to say the capital  cost that you can approach,  the slope  5 centimeter  for 
every  1 meter  towards  the long side it is better , tank elevated  to 20 centimeter  to the floor  level  
for easy drainage  and because  it will make  proper  flow through  the drainage  line to do not to 
sediment ed, suspended  solid  will not be sedimented  it will be definitely  go out of the system  
by the drainage  line. 2 meter  gap between  the two rows  of tank it is very important  for 
workspace .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:15)  
 
Algal culture  tank the smaller  shallow  tanks  not more  than 1 tonne  capacity  of depth  around  
0.5 meter.  Adequate  light is essential  for fast algal  growth.  Material  of construction  has to be 
bamboo  or the plastic  materials . Air supply,  aeration  is essential  in a hatchery  to provide  ample  
amount  of oxygen  and to keep  larva  and food particles  in suspension.  Electrical  blower  
compressors  and also the portable  aerators  are used to sometimes .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:48)  
 
The seawater  supply  in general,  adequate  supply  of seawater  is very much  essential  for the 
hatcheries.  And I remember  I discussed  with you in the very beginning  of the lecture  that we 
will be discussing  in details  about  how the sea water  supply  is provided.  So, how do you think  
the seawater  is supplied  to your farm?  What  can be the provable  techniques  by which  you can 
go ahead  with this. Here,  I have  already  discussed  the four different  ways  of supplying  seawater  
to hatcheries.  I am 100 percent  sure you will come  out with thousands  of more  ways  and 
different  techniques  by which  you can supply  the seawater  to your hatchery  or to your farms .  
These are the general  ways  of supplying  seawater . First pumping  directly  from  the sea, where  
you have  the you can see the foot valves  are there  with a proper  filter  mechanism  so that it will 
not be choked  very easily.  So, with this foot valves  this line quite  deep  to the seawater  and then 
the water  is actually  it has to be lower  than the lowest  low tide level  you know  why it is because  
there  should  be a continuous  supply  of water  and the water  has to be the foot valve  has to be 
below  the waterline  at any point  of time.   
In order  to do so, lowest  low tide level  low tide level  is the one at which  at least water  will 
prevail  for sure no matter  what  happens  unless  until some  very rare a tsunami  went  or 
something.  So, most  of the cases  the one lowest  low tide level  is like considered  as the lowest  
point  at which  the sea water  will prevail  at any point  of time.  And so, your foot valve  has to be 
below  that low level  water  level.   
Then there  comes  the pumping  from  the sump  pit you can have  a proper  line in a sump  pit 
where  the water  will seep through  it and which  you will collect  with time and from  sump  pit 
you can just pump  the water , what  is the additional  benefit  of it like it is like already filtered  
water  not in a not 100 percent.  You have  to do it again  before  supplying  to your farm  though,  
but still it is like quite  filtered  because  it will go through  the stratum  of gravel  and rocks  and it 
will come  to the sump  pit.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  14:06)  
 
The third method  is like continuous  it is like pumping  from  seabed  using  the perforated  PVC  
pipes  which  is sometimes  does not make  sense  actually  frankly  speaking.  We normally  do it 
like just below  the seabed  they would  like perforated  UPVC  line we call it in this UPVC  we 
there  is like perforations , in the perforations  we have  this small  foam  these  foams  are acting  as 
a kind of filter  material,  when  we sunk  the water  through  the pump  through  this perforated  
tubes  the water  will come  in contact  because  first of all the water  is getting  filtered  through  the 
sea bed and then through  the foam  and at the end the pure water , pure sea water  you can collect.  
So that is one way of getting  rid of the additi onal filtering  mechanism  or the cleaning  
mechanism  of seawater,  creating  the seawater  before  supplying  to your farm.   
Forth,  mechanism  is like pumping  from  an inshore  well, what  is an inshore  well?  You have  to 
have  you can have  proper  you can have  a proper  structure  concrete  well you can develop  by 
the side of your coastal  region  and that coastal  unit will be filled  with gravel.  So, water  
definitely  by because  of natural  phenomena  water  has to be water  line has to be almost  same  
inside  the well outside  the well and then the when  you capture  the well depending  upon  the 
different  pressure  anyway.   
So, when  you capture  the water  when  you like suck the water  through  this well for your 
hatchery  purposes,  the requirement  of additional treatment  of water  is getting  reduced.  So, 
these  are some  of the ways  by which  we normally  collect  the seawater,  but this not the only 
one. So, if you want  you can definitely  design  your own way of doing  so.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:01)  
 
So, sea is the in case of the sea water  which  is incoming  like which  is like you can see the with 
the arrow  the inflow  of sea water  in the first picture  on the left upper  side. So, it is it actually  
has gone  through  filtration  unit, filtration  procedure , sand,  graded  gravel  then etc and then at 
the end it will go you have  to see out flow region.  So, from  where  it is collected.   
So, the depth  of this filter  bed has to be around  1 meter  0.75 to 1 meter  in size. So, the proper  
treatment  can be done.  And with frequently  like what  will happen  it will get choked  very easily  
because  these sand particles  has a very small  specific  surface area.  Like in general,  that is where  
poor areas  are getting  clogged  easily , how to get rid of this clogging,  sometimes  what  we do 
we do a reverse  back  flushing  we call back  flushing  on the back  washing,  when  we do the back  
washing  like through  the outlet  and we connect  the inlet and we pump  it what  will happen .  
So, because  of the fresh  water  pumping  the all the clogging  particles  or like what  are the pollen  
particles,  which  are the reason  for this clogging,  they will get out of the we can get rid of this 
clogging  particle  and it will go out along  with outflow  whatever  it is that also we can again  
throw  it back  to the seawater.  So, that is how the back washing  is actually  taking  place.  So, the 
we are collecting  the seawater  through  this filtration  unit you can see the seawater  reservoir , so 
tank one, tank two, tank three , tank four, tank six and to the other  tanks  is going  like this way 
you will normally  design  the distribution  channel.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:39)  
 
So, when  we design  this hatcheries  the prawn  hatcheries  the building  and equipment  is very 
important.  We normally  go ahead  with the concrete  building  or a building  with a local  
inexpensive  materials  like bamboo  or housing  or the larval tanks  and etc. Sometimes,  what  we 
do now is we do the poly housing  also which  actually  helps  sometimes  in the temperate  region,  
because  of the poly housing  the temperature  inside  the poly housing  outside  the outside  is it 
really  matter  it really  varies.   
So, even  if the temperature  outside  is a little bit less the temperature  inside  will be at least 4 to 
5 degrees  Celsius  higher  than the outside  because  of the greenhouse  effect.  The low 
wavelength , high wavelength  sunlight  phenomena  (())(18:26)  anyway . So, because  of that, it 
also sometimes  makes  sense  to design  a poly houses  for this kind of hatchery  design  and all.  
Equipment  like thermometer,  hydro meter , hemocytometer , refractometer  has to be there . 
Micros cope  and refrigerator , refrigerator  has to be. Beakers,  drainers  of varying  types , mesh  
sizes,  harvesting  box, scoop  nets, these  are the equipments  that equipment  that we need  to have  
in your hatcheries  and all these  equipments  that you will procure  based  on the type of 
involvement  and the type of users.  So, it depends.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:09)  
 
So, these  are the things  that we normally  follow  these  are things that we normally  collect,  we 
normally  offer  designing,  we normally  put in our (())(19:16)  system.  The spawner  and the 
broodstock  trans port, which  is very important  and if you see in the picture  in the left, what  is 
the right  time for transport  definitely  in sunrise  time or in the sunset  times , they are still in the 
not at his high active  stage.   
And in case of sunlight  exposure  also what  will happen  in case of white  day and what  will 
happen  it will be it will cause  some  anxiety  and additional stress to your broodstock  so that is 
why it is better  to collect  them  and transport  them  in early  sunrise  or early  after sunset  time.  
So, normally  it is collected  in oxygenated  plastic  double  bags and then it can be transported  
from  one place  to another .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:07)  
 
Larval  rearing , so which  is one of the most  important  part of prawn  hatchery.  So, these  
procedures  must  be done  well for successful  fry production  like spawning  and hatching , 
stocking  of naulpii,  you know  what  is naulpii  like naulpii  we discussed  about  it in the very 
beginning  of the lecture  like I mean  like earlier  lectures,  the feeding  because  naulpii  is like 
initial  stage  of prawn . So, it is their stages  of their maturation  stage  actually,  early  stage  of their 
maturation  level . Feeding  and the water  management  in order  to go for successful  fry 
production,  we have  to take care of these  procedures.   
How  spawning  and hatching  is important.  Clean  and oxygenated  seawater  with the salinity  of 
30 to 35 ppt is required  with a temperature  range  of around  say like 20 to 30 degrees  Celsius  
and the spawning  it will take place  between  10 pm to 4 am which  is in the late night,  so in the 
late night  is the best time for the spawning  to take place  and it lasts for around  2 to 7 minutes.  
And the eggs hatch into the naulpii  from  12 to 15 hours  after that spawning . So, for this period  
of time it is very important , it is very precious  time because  any small  environmental  changes  
or any small  manual  error  can completely  disrupt  your farming  product.   
So, during  this 12 to 15 hours  you have  to be very cautious.  And once  the hatchlings  are out of 
your eggs,  then you have to like which  we call there  is naulpii’s  so this naulpii’s  you have  to 
take care of it you have  to start rearing  them  in a larval  tanks.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:50)  
 
Stopping  of naulpii  in general  the rearing  tanks  properly  we have  to clean  the rearing  tanks  and 
we stock  like 50-100 larva e per liter of diesel  say like 1000  liters  1000  multiplied  by 100. So 
that many  larva e can be easily  cultured  or how to say sheltered  or produced  in a farm  in your 
rearing  time.  Feeding,  proper  nutrition  must  be ensured  for the larva e algae  can be 
phytoplankton  culture,  mostly  used for food for shrimp  and prawn  larva e. Other  foods  like egg 
yolk,  artemia,  cysts , etc can also be provided.  This is for the larval  stage  because  for them  they 
need  live food mainly  as we already know,  what  is the reason  behind  it, what  we to provide  
live feed and why they need  this live feed and how they can get more  benefit  out of it.  
Water management,  water  quality  in the rearing  tank deteriorate  with the deposition  of the fecal  
matter  and the uneaten  food.  And because  they are in a very early  stage  of development,  the 
fecal  matter  their feeding  rate is also very high,  their fecal  matter  generation  is also very high.  
And because  of that the water  quality get deteriorated  very fast. So, that is why daily  water  
exchange  of around  30 percent  of the total volume  is like almost  necessary  and which  is like 
really  huge.   
Like you cannot  just do it with a regular  freshwater  exchange  nowadays  because,  or like I 
mean,  let us see water  exchange  nowadays  because  it will cost you a lot. I am not talking about  
the seawater  cost, I am talkin g about  the convinced  charge,  I am talking  about  the transportation  
charge,  cleaning  charge,  pumping  cost and etc. So, it is a lot of cost that that involves with it, 
so, how to get rid of it.  
Again,  I am telling  you again  and again  the best thing  is the recirculatory  aquaculture  systems , 
you design  it, treatment  unit, treat it and take it back  to the water system  again,  it is like in a 
how to say insitu solution  like there  are only you have  the solutions  ready  with that you do not 
have  to go outside  and think  about  procedures  and problems  and how to troubleshooting  
measures  and all. Regular  siphoning  of the culture  tank bottom  sediment  is very important  at 
least 2 to 3 times  per week.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:00)  
 
And once  it reaches  the post larval  stage,  they transfer  to the nursery  tanks  or the post larval  
rearing  tank to avoid  the overcrowding  of the fry in the rearing  tank or say like larval  tank and 
to vacate  larval  rearing  tanks . So, the reason  why we transfer  it, so, it is advantageous  to nurse  
the early  post turbine  tanks  instead  of stocking  them  directly  in the nursery  pond because  in 
case of tanks,  you can better  control  the environment  in a very precise  way and stocking  density  
of around  3000  to 5000  post larva  per tonne  of seawater  is possible  with a substrate  of bamboo  
slats,  fine nylon  materials  and polyprophylene  netting  materials  can be used.  
As a feed we provide  the mussel  meat , the trash  fishes  etc. Because  they already reach  a certain  
stage  so for them  they very high animal  protein  is very much  essential  for them  and not only 
essential  like they the more  the better  the food that you provide  the better  the production  yield  
that you will be getting  as simple  as that. Water management  at least four times  a week  around  
30 to 50 percent  of change  of water  volume  each day and siphon  excess  feeds  that is very 
important  in case of post larval  system  as well.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:23)  
 
So, now,  the post larval  system  is designed  now,  we need  to think  about  the harvesting  of the 
catch  harvesting  of our product , packing  and transporting  them . What is the standard  way of 
doing  that, you just harvest  the product  by using  the netting  or just reduce  the water  and then 
collect  the product  or the fry and then count  them  there  is like counting  mechanism  is nowadays  
it is not that earlier  like earlier  days we used to do it by manually  but thanks  to the technology  
now you do not have  to do that there  is a manual  there  is the electronic  counting  machines  
which  are available.   
So, you just put the water  through  it like so, there  will be like laser  unit so, it will it can easily  
catch  count  the number  of fingerlings  that crosses  the that particular  boundary  and because  of 
by means  of which  we can easily  calculate  the number  you can easily  count  the number  of 
fingerlings  of your system  of your farm .  
Then you pack  it pack  them  in oxygenated  plastic  bags and then transport  it to the Styrofoam  
inside  of Styrofoam . So, that is obsolete  now not obsolete  there  things  still people  are doing  
that but there  are thousands  of other  mechanisms  are coming  out nowadays  and were  very 
enhanced  packing  mechanisms  are nowadays  are there  which  helps  them  to be in its stage  for 
long.   
So, other  than that we have  to when  we transport  it be it is better  to have  a proper  the freezing  
mechanism  we call it is freezing  trucks  and all that you have  to have  so you can have  the proper  
freezer  trucks  or you can have  this ice cube  bags and all where  you can also put your inside  of 
styrofoam  these  ice cube  bags to make  your make  the proper  temperature  sometimes  we 
supplied  with the salt mix this ice cubes  or we call it ice crust.  So, that actually  what  it does,  
why we mix the salt to reduce  its melting  point  because  in general  the ice it melts  at 0 degrees  
when  you add it with the salt and all it will reduce  as its melting  point  after further  couple  of 
degrees.   
So because  of that it can sustain  for long in its ice stage  and all. It is a scientific 
phenomena (())(27:53)  you can Google  it and you can get a better  idea about  it. And if the travel  
time is more  than 6 hour these  plastic  bags are also has to be placed  up and down.  So, to with 
the air filled  plastic  bags which  will further  give it additional protection  from  the radiation  
based  effect  from  the outer  atmosphere  and all.  
So, anyway,  you have  to make  sure that there  is no temperature  exchange,  whether  it be 
conduction,  convection  or radiation.  So, that the ice can be at its stage  for long and then it will 
definitely  possibly  help your produce  or possibly  help your yield  product  to sustain  for a longer  
period  of time.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  28:40)  
 
So, in general  in conclusion,  what  we can say the prawn  hatchery  plays  an important  role in 
supplying  a steady  state supply  of fry. It properly  designed  the components  of the hatchery  can 
ensure  a successful  fry production .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  28:54)  
 
 
And this is as because  prawn  is a very high value  product , high value  species, natural  source  
of fry are limited  and in order  to expand  the production  of prawn  fry has to be available  in 
abundance  and what  is the only way of doing  it is the only way of doing  it is the improve  the 
prawn  hatchery  design.  So, we can design  proper  prawn  hatchery  and which  will definitely  
give us a way to collect  the fry which  is sufficient  enough  for the supply  of or requirement  of 
all the market  and all, so that is it for the prawn  hatcher y, the shrimp  hatchery.  Next,  we will 
be discussing  about  the design  of shrimp  hatchery  and all this is the reference  from  which  I 
have  taken  couple  of pictures  and the material . So, thank  you so much.  We will see you in the 
coming  lecture.  Thank  you. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  29:48)  
 
