Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 28  
Feed Formulation  – Linear Programming  
Hello everyone , welcome to the third lecture of the mod ules aquafeed  technology . So my 
name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick, I am from the Agriculture and Food Engineering 
department of Indian Institute of Technology,  Kharagpur .  
(Refer Slide Time 00:36)  
 
In this lecture module will be discussing about the concepts like introduction to the linear 
programming as you already remember in the last lecture we discussed about different feed 
formulation methods . The first one we discussed already pearson box method , so in this 
lecture method will be discussing abou t the linear programming method .  
How linear programming based least cost formulation is calculated and what are the 
components of this LP based feed formulation software . And what are the available 
commercial LP based  software for feed formulation process  and what is the advantages and 
disadvantages of them .  (Refer Slide Time: 1:14)  
 
 
So in general, linear programming was developed by the R ussian mathematician Leonid 
Kantorovichto,  so he first formulated or developed this linear programming method dur ing 
the seco nd world war and which  primarily to provide the military logistics solutions and 
frankly speaking this world war  in this crisis situation only the the maximum of the scientific 
development takes place in human history , this is one of the exampl es.  
This linear  programming it was introduced in the first time during the mid 1950s for the 
animal compound field industry as well and this technique now involves the allocation , 
selection and evolution of the limited resources to achieve an optimal solu tion. So linear 
programming has extensive application in the industrial process like mixing , blending machin e tooling along with the business activities like planning , bidding , purchasing , 
transportation and a distribution network and all these things deve loped.   
Recentl y a least cost food formulation procedure was introduced in the aqua feed industry 
based on the principles of linear programming . In the context of feed formulation like the 
limited resource that can be the nutrients and the ingredients and u ltimate objecti ve is to find 
out the lowest cost at which the available ingredients can be combined to develop the 
product .  
So first one let us  discuss about the least cost formulation , from the name itself  you can 
understand that what we are targeting he re; we are ta rgeting the nutrients which are essential 
for development of your product , however , you are  searching for the least cost method by 
which you just optimize the ample amount of supplements that is the nutrients that is required 
by getting it don e by using th e raw materials which are cheap in cost .  
It can be costly raw materials  as well but you have to optimize , use it very optimally so that is 
what we are doing here . For that you have to use the linear programming method otherwise it 
is very dif ficult for no rmal human calculation process . So linear program ming  is the process 
by which we can easily calculate , we can formulate the required feed for our reared aquatic 
species .  
It involves with the calculation of several food ingredients in definite  proportions to pro vide 
the targeted aquatic species , a well -balanced nutritional food at a lowest possible cost as we 
discussed . So required consideration of factors like first nutrient requirements o f the targeted 
species that you need to remember that y ou need to jot it d own first , second competency of 
the species to digest and assimilate the nutrients from various available ingredients .  
So suppose as we discussed in the last lecture about the pearson box method remember we 
use rice brans and ground nut  oils and also , we use this ingredient which already has the 
nutrients which is required but at which percentage we need to use them ; that is  the matter of 
concern.  That is  where  the linear programming comes into the picture and then we start doing 
the least cost formulation  methods .  (Refer Slide Time 04:36)  
 
  
 
So what are the components that is required when we do the linear programming based  feed 
formulation we use these softwares and all , mainly it use three database . First one is the 
nutrient , second is the ingredi ent and third is the products . So what is the nutrient definitely 
you need to understand , what is the percentage of nutrient or what is the role of it in your 
target reared species  and all , you have to remember all the values .  
So that i s why nutrient plays a si gnificant role in the formulation system as they link both the 
ingredients and the product you understand , ingredient here is the raw material , nutrient is the 
expected outcome or  I would say like not outcome better say th at expect ed proportion of 
nutrient  that it requires . Third thing is the product , so raw material process product ; so 
ingredients , nutrient , product .  Nutrient is the major link between the ingredients and the product and it also give the 
database with the informati on about the correspondin g units and may also have some 
additional information like the aquatic species to which the nutrients may be available 
applicable . So what are the list of commonly used nutrients which are available for a 
aquafeed  formulat ion, what  are the information this  is given in this table if you see .  
What are the information we need to provide ; moisture content , crude protein , crude  fat, fiber 
level , ash content , ma cro minerals like calcium , phosphorus , sodium , etc. Phosphorus is 
usually expressed in available basis , why I said my macro minerals these are the most 
essential mineral materials .  
It has a higher value , higher amount of macronutrients are required for aqua feed 
formulations , whereas the trace minerals like zinc , manganese , iron, copper , selenium it 
needs in a very smaller percentage . Then there comes this amino acids , what type of amino 
acids you are  providing like say it is arginine , histidine , lysine,  methionine  and like it has to 
be provided that with the number or the percentag e and it is normally expr essed in digestible 
basis.   
It is not the amino acid that is available but digestible , you cannot just say like it has this 
percentage of  amino acid,  this percentage of  lysine is available for that and suppose this 
lysine  is like it is bounded in nature an d it is not actually digestible for the purpose of feed 
formulation , purpose of your larvae or purpose of your target rearing species , so it does not  
make sense .  
So this amino acids are normally expressed in the form of d igestible  bases , fatty acids and 
other lipid contents like linoleic acid , linolenic acid,  EPA,  DHA,  cholesterol , phospholipids , 
etc. Starch and non -starch polysaccharides , energy usually expressed in a digestible energy 
for aquafeeds,  in general it is like  kilo cal orie per kg or mega joule  per kg and vitamins like 
vitamin A,  thiamine , and riboflavin  like this is the form of vitamin D and it is normally in the 
milligram per l kg or microgram per kg something like that .  
So these are these different forms of nutrients  that we normally require  and what are the 
components of software assisted feed formulation , if you see the formulator , he or she needs 
information regarding the ingredient availability , what will be the nutrient composition that 
we require , what is the in gredient price from which the nutrient will be available , what is the limitation of ingredient or is it really available in your  near vicinity like your near market or 
not and whether it has to be transported from outside .  
All these factors nutri ent requi rement of the species all these  factors are very important for 
the formulator to put the values in the linear programming method and any kind of method 
can be used and any kind of software is used in using this linear programming method and 
that w ill give you the exact feed formulation values .  
The physical parameters like  smell,  density and color and functional parameters like 
palatability or attractability  are also treated as nutrients in formulation systems , apart from the 
actual nutrients as in nutritio nal science.  Because these are s omething which is very 
important you just cannot deny the factor that you prepare a best optimal solution , optimal 
feed formulation for your system and which smells very bad .  
No one going to use it which has a  very high int ensity , so it will definitely be  useful for your 
floating purpose , anyways I am  just giving you an example . It is color it is like functional 
parameters like palatability  whether it is palatable or not , whether it is attractable or not for 
the fish and all .  
There are different factors w hich actually involves when you design ; that is  why these 
parameters are also important and considered as a kind of passive nutrients or passive nutrient 
requirement when we do the synthesis when we do this cal culation in software  for this linear 
programmi ng. What are the ingredients database stores information like ingredient names , 
availability and nutrition composition of the ingredients and their cost .  
So this informations are very important in terms of ing redient , we di scuss about the nutrition 
till n ow now we discuss about the ingredient . So what is the name of the ingredients from 
which the nutrient will be taken , it is available in the lower market , it is composition by 
nutrient composition inside the in gredient just like in the last example in la st lectu re, the rice 
bran has 18 po int something percentage or 12.8 percentage of crude  protein and which is 
important , this information is needed and what is the cost for it .  
You can have source of crude  protei n and which co st like thousand rupees or ten thousand 
rupees a kilo, so you d efinitely not go for it , so these are the informations that you need to 
have . Within the database a nutrient composition table for any ingredient is commonly known as the matrix a nd the matrix always reflects the influence of the individual ingredients on the 
nutritional value of the final feed .  
(Refer Slide Time 11:17)  
 
 
See this is the sample matrix value of example soybean meal , suppose you are preparing a 
soybean meal for yo ur fish for yo ur reared  species which has 46 percent as a protein content , 
so these are the matrix value of the example soybean meal.  What does that mean , dry matter  
88 percentage , crude protein 46.3 percentage , crude fat 2.7 , crude fiber 4.5 .  
Digestible energy 3.3150 kilocalorie per kg , calcium 0.35 percentage , digestible lysine , 
digestible methionine  thionine,  choline  all these values are given . So all this is called the 
matrix value of all the nutrients available for your final feed formulation . The cos t of ingredien ts is usually calculated after adding the cost of goods , transp orts and other additional 
taxes .  
Some feed manufacturer may also include the cost of shrinkage due to the pests,  evaporation 
loss, process loss and the financing in the cost of ingredients.  Product specification when we 
calculate it involves defining the desired nutrient levels along with the ingredient inclusion  
levels ; this is the product that I am  talking about . Now nutrient is discussed ingredient is 
discussed now is the final  product .  
Final product specification when we discuss about it invol ves with the defining the desired 
nutrient  level along with the ingredient inclusion level and upper and the lower limit is set for 
each nutrient and ingredient . The constraints are the drivers of the solutions and involve a 
significant cost associated with it , what does th at mean like suppose you know  your final 
product , you have to know your final product before you discuss anything in a linear 
programming method or any method y ou have to know your fi nal product , what is  your 
target .  
When you know the target spe cies, in your target feed the crude protein level has to be 25 
percent then only you can start discussing about all the other factors ; you have to know this 
factor you ha ve to know this specifi cation , product specification that is very important . So 
once  you know  this product specification then you starts  calculating the amount of ingredient 
that it requires because you know the amount of nutrient present in the ingred ient itself , you 
got my poi nt.  
So from there we calculate and we do the reverse engineeri ng kind of thing and then we came 
up with the final amount of ingredients that it requires to get a final value of crude  protein of 
25 percent in the final product , which is how it is done . So the constraints are the driver of the 
solutions and involving t he significant cost associated with it definitely , if unrealistic target or 
conflicting constraints are set within the product specification then an error called the 
infeasible solution will be  returned by the program definitely .  
If you remember in the la st lecture  I have given you one problem  I have discussed about 
when we discuss about the Pearson’s  box method , I have given you some problem just let me 
know whether it is a infeasible solution  or the feasible solution ? Your  ingredient has 20 
percent of crude protein , A a has 20 percent crude  protein , B has 10 percent crude  protein. Now I am  asking you to develop a final product which is having 50 percent crude protein  
how are you going to  devel op it?  
I am not allowing you to concentrate anything if I am simply allowing you to only mix it is it 
possible to go for final product with a 50 percentage of concentrated crude  protein only by 
mixing , no concentration is done , no concentration technique is used , no other manipulation 
is used , only simply mixing , it is infeasible , that is  what we need to discuss that is  why we 
need to understand . Unrealistic target you cannot do it so you cannot come up with the 
product which is having with unrealistic or the conflicting constraints .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:35 )  
 
So this is the example of the product specification of a tilapia grower feed . Now that we 
know that in order to make a feed for tilapia grower feed you need to have a nut rient 
available for the fee d crude protein level is around minimum 28 percent then you can  start 
discussing about the factors like what are the ingredients that you can use so that your final 
product should have at least 28 percentage of the crude protein .  
Same way fiber concentrat ion should be maximum 4 percentage , you cannot have ingredients  
which can suppose you mix up a certain ingredients and then you come up with more than 28 
percentage of crude  protein but it also contains 10 percentage of fiber def initely it is not 
usable , definitely it is not acceptable for as a tilapia grower feed . Then there comes the 
computational method then there comes all these linear programming softwares and all where 
they are useful for us to finalize , optimize s values of the ingredient specificatio ns.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:45 )  
 
What is the solving mechanism l ike what are the software programs that is available with this 
linear programming based feed formulation software those are available I am not going int o 
details there are different linear pr ogramming techniques that you can simply google and you 
can learn  from the NPTEL  lecture materials only and if you want further discussion you can 
definitely contact with me anytime .  
And definitely you can or any way  in Google is available you just simply  search for linear 
programming methods you can got to know a lot of lecture material available on this 
particular sector and you get to know more in detail in depth knowledge . So just because in 
this lecture maintain  I do not  want to go in detail discussio n of all these methods because the 
time constraint .  
So I will  only discuss about the software packages those are available for this feed 
formulation method . We have a method called solver , we have a software called s olver a 
microsoft excel add -in tool tha t is available that you can simply use it and it is famously used  
by the students , teachers and feed mixing operators and all . It can adjust the values present in 
desirable variable cells  for satisfying the limit of t he constraints  cell and to produce the 
results in the objective cells in absolute manner .  (Refer Slide  Time 18:02)  
 
 
There is another software  that is Winfeed  it is an inexpensive software package it provides 
easy to operate user interfaces to manage t he feed formulation for teachers  and sm all scale 
feed mixing problems . Another software Feedsoft  which also prov ide the user friendly 
interface , multiple clients and plants and like cloud services can be managed simultaneously 
to provide professional  tools for a consultant and the small scale f eed companies.   
Other than that Adifo  they have this Bestmix  software , feed management system from the 
Brill software , Format international from Format  software , A systems from Aliix2 software . 
These are certain  softwares and which are available sometimes in packages and sometimes 
even in free learning methods also , so this you c an use along with accuring  knowledge more about the linear programming how it actually been done in mathematical way and then you 
go ahe ad with this using these packages that will g ive you more in -depth idea about how 
actually feed formulation has been tak ing place and how it is to be done .  
These are the some screenshot of the some feed formulation software Winfeed,  Feedsoft and 
there is a Indian  made Kasturi  is a freeware available  which is suitable for poultry and feed 
formulations and all know so that a lso you can use.  All these data  are available from the 
Vasagam et al 2015, I will  share you the reference so that you can go google  it and you can 
learn from the paper itself , the r eport itself so what the softwares are  and how it works and 
what are the in formation that you need to know before you run these softwares .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:48 )  
 
In general , this all this enterprise level feed formulation solutions can be provided b y using 
these softwares for large scale operations . The software packages o ffer of for optimization of 
any one single and multiple formulas at a single time , it can give you the effective 
formulation of sup plements , concentrate , and the premixes . Integrati on with laboratory data 
and the pre -loaded automated ingredient value recal culating models is possible .  
Sensitivity analysis you can do that , how much of a stochastic  programming like this is a 
stochastic  programming method . So in general this software pa ckages has all the necessary 
requirement available for you to do a single -handed practice on feed formulation for your 
target aquatic species or reared  aquatic species .  (Refer Slide Time: 20:42 )  
 
What a re the advantages of these softwares ; the facility  to adjust formulas on a daily basis , 
ability to handle any number of ingre dients or nutrients using the formula , possibility to do 
the complex restriction on the nutrient level and ingredient inclusion , rapid and it  is very 
simple , does not  require a prof essional nutritionist for handling the routine operation s, it can 
be centra lized and operated by the formulator from any part of the world and he can provide 
you with the data or information .  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:12 )  
 
What are the disadvantages , optimi zation of the formula for nutrient level s alone may not be 
ideal in terms o f production performance , sometimes only on the basis of nutrients when you optimize these formulas and all sometimes it will not g ive you the exact , it is like if you do a 
calculat ion and proper scientific method and do all this chemical formula and softw are you 
put things and then you make a mix up, or like “khichdi”  like the famous food normally being 
eaten by northeast India peopl e and then even in S outh India always it is availa ble I am not 
sure about it like how it called there everywhere so in genera l it is called “khichdi”.   
So if you go for proper feed formulation  software and all you have to optimize all those 
things at the e nd the final product you may not like it that is possible . Though it has all the 
nutrients possible , it has all the aroma , smell everything but something will not click because 
we have all the other taste organs with all the all the other sensory organs no t everything is 
like perfect , not everything can b e made perfect by only optimizing nothing there must be 
something that you are left with .  
So I am just giving you in terms of very unscientific discussions that  I am doing right now 
but in general scientif ically it is doable everything is optimizable but  I am saying still there 
must be something that can be left and must be some thing that is not formula table like you 
can just not use it for your feed formulation , it is not possible sometimes .  
Those techniq ues or those particular type of ingredients or tas te or it needs to be , how to say 
one to one basis you cannot just go ahead  with it so there are restrictions on this method as 
well disadvantages , but though  I would not say much of a disadvantage there is a possibility 
to withstand it or to somehow troubl eshoot  it. Minor error during the preliminary database 
can create huge seriou s error in the whole formula and at the end you will end up with 
creating nuisance in your farm , because of the providing non app ropriate fish feed.   (Refer Slide Time 23:36)  
.
  
So in this lecture and from the previous lecture we understand the feed fo rmulation , we 
understand the pearson box method now we understand in this lecture the linear 
programming methods , why they are us ed, what are the software packages , how we can 
understand it better , what is the purpose of using it .  
So it was introduced rec ently in this aqua  feed industry , the LP  based least cost feed  
formulation method , softwares are available at least with the thre e database , one is for 
ingredients , nutrients and products . Feed formulations software can be centralized which is 
like the fut uristic model that we are talking about . Once it is centralized you do not  have to 
do it each home basis , one centralized feed fo rmulation  software is there .  
So suppose  can be op erated by any formulator from any part of the world that is doable and 
that i s why these software packages are becoming very popular and those are normally very 
much user friendly . It is a in general what i s the take away from this lecture , the linear 
program is a mathematical technique which involves the allocation , selection and evolution 
of limited resources to achieve an optimal solution or the optimal requirement .  
Least cost formulation combines the se veral  feed ingredients in definite proportions to 
provide the targeted aquatic species a well balanced nutritional feed at the lowest possible 
cost, and the nutrients plays a significant role in the formulation system as they both link the 
ingredients as w ell as the product .  
So based on the product requi rement , based on the nutrient availability and based on the 
nutrient availabl e in the ingredient we kind of match these three different resources and we use it to make up for optimal solution , we need to ma ke it for optimal resource final feed 
formulation .  
Feed formulation software does not require the professional nutritionist in  general , that is the 
best thing about it and it can be centralized and formulator can be from any place in the world 
and they ca n utilize the software and they can use it for the ir purposes , so this is the future of 
feed formulation and these techniques p eople are working on it since scientists are working 
on more advanced techniques like advanced software packages and all .  
These are the references from which  I have taken some in formations you can click the picture 
you can just google this material , you w ill get to know a lot of information from it . So thank 
you so much that is it for this lecture material , we will see you in the n ext lecture thank you 
so much .  