Advance Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture – 26 
Balance d Diet 
Hello, everyone welcome to the sixth module on the Aquafeed  technology . My name is Professor  
Gourav Dhar Bhowmick, I am from the Agriculture and Food Engineering Department of Indian 
Institute of Technology,  Kharagpur . So in this particular lecture we will  be discussing about the 
balanced diet not for us but for the aquatic specie s.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:43)  
 
The major concepts that I will  try to cover is like introduction to the aquafeed , what is that 
aquafeed,  what are the major constituents and major like ingredients of  an aquafeed.  Introduction 
to balanced diet , components of  a balanced diet , protein , lipids and fatty acids and the 
carbohydrates .  (Refer Slide Time: 01:05)  
 
So in general if you talk about the aquafeed , you know that recently the aquaculture is getting 
bloomed all over the world . And now it is almost at 50 - 50 percent , like 50 percent of the 
capture fishery and 50 percent of the culture fisheries . So this culture fisheries  is nothing but the 
aquaculture in general when we talk about . So it is blooming like anything even like in last 
couple of decades .  
So and  because  of that aquaculture comes from its extensive to the intensive aquaculture systems 
in open to closed aquaculture systems . So how does it matter ? What are the factors that it 
involves like when we talk about  conversion of technology like this ? In general wh en we were 
discussing about the when we were reading our aquatic animals when we were capturing the 
aquatic  species from the nature itself we do not need to …  
We do no t have  to worry about the feed . We do no t have to worry about what it takes , what  it 
eats and all . But when we talk about when we start thinking about taking all the culture system , 
all these capture  fisheries to the culture fisheries  and when we start culturing this aquatic species 
by ourselves in optimal conditions , providing the opt imal con ditions and mimicking the natural 
environment .  
We need to provide t hem with the feed . And what they are going  eat? So this is the basic thing , 
the food that it requires for the aquaculture species to grow is very important . And it gen erally it constitutes  as high as 50 to 60 percent of the total cost involved with the aquaculture. B ecause 
this is the major recurring cost . Because when we talk about the capital cost like the non -
recurring cost when we develop the structure itself and al l.  
But recur ring cos t is very important it comes like day -to-day basis , even hourly basis also like 
based on the culture species . So in general the aquafeed  production is expected to be around 
101.3 million tons by 2025 , which is like very huge , and you c an easily ide ntify you can easily 
understand like how good of a market , still it lies in the con in countries like India .  
If you go ahead  and start thinking about the proper chemical compositions and if you can 
develop your own business model in aquafeed  technology  it is actu ally one of the major t hrust 
area of aquaculture now  a days  in India . And people are really looking for the cheap and  highly 
nutritious and properly  balanced diet or the feed available for their aquatic species to grow .  
In general aquafeed  technol ogy it i nvolves the conversion of raw material of agriculture and 
animal origin into the feed .  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:41)  
 
So mostly  we depend upon the fish oil and fish meal . So it is very surprising that when we go for 
aquaculture  most of t he aquacultur e specie s they are carnivorous or say like omnivorous in 
nature . So what they do they only take food which is highly , which contains high amount of fish meal or fish oil . And to get this fish meal and fish oil you have to culture again or you have to 
catch  it from  the here .  
So this is  the vicious circle it i s you go for aquaculture and for the aquaculture you have to make 
feed, you have to give them feed and the feed is what fish itself , so that also you have to culture 
or otherwise you have t o capture aga in. So t hat is why this balance you have to maintain . Either 
you have to culture the fishes which can be utilized for as a fish meal for other type of fishes or 
either you have , you go for capture fi shes and which will , which does no t make sen se.  
So at th e end yo u have a imbalanced , you a re actually not like properly balancing your, the 
environmental condition . So in general what we need to do , we need to think about the optimal 
condition , optimal diet manner that we can prepare for your cultu re species , where the re is as 
minimum as  fish meal as possible , from the capture fisheries rather than the fish meals which are 
coming from the culture fisheries or the waste fish products or waste fish materials or like that 
can be somehow used .  
I am not saying it i s just an  example I a m giving I will  give you one details how the how all these 
things actually does matter and  how fishmeal and fish oil is essential . And how they prepare and 
how they are actually being prepared and how they can they are actu ally utilized  by othe r fishes 
and for their growth , other aquatic species for their growth .  
In general due to the fluctuating prices , limited availability and the growing apprehensions on the 
sustainability of fishmeal and fish oil , nowadays the focus has  been shifted  to the i ncorporation 
of ingredients like  protein meals of plant and animal origin in the aquafeed. W hat is the option 
for that like say algal milk .  
Seaweed , seaweed is very important , nowadays people are working on it , like how the seaweed 
can be  like, when we su ppose extracted the important essentials like some import ant essential 
nutrients or the byproducts for it . And then that extracted biomass , how that can be used or say 
like not extracted biomass  directly that seaweed only , how they ca n be utilized  say like  they can 
be dry , they can be make it in the powder form and they can be supplied with the  diet for a 
shrimp .  And it is found out that they are actually much more beneficial than fish diet in some cases , 
because they are also reaching the essenti al nutrie nts available for a new , needed for the culture 
species growth . So this is the alternate , algal meal is the alternate . Micro algal meal is the 
alternate . Macro algal mean like seaweeds are alternate to the fish meal diet .  
What are the other  alternate like  as we discussed the microalgae like the size of  schizochytrium  
you can see they have replaced the fish oil diet by 40 to 100 percent  and in species like salmon , 
grouper , channel , catfish and tilapia,  et cetera .  
This is what w e need , this is what  we need to think about we need to , this is the futuristic feed 
module , feed model that we need to focus on developing . And countries like India  it is very 
essential for us to find out a proper feed formulation  technique , so that that c an be utilized by th e 
even po or of the poorest farmers without hampering their economic benefit .  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:18)  
 
So when we discuss about all thes e things  like diet and all it i s very important to discuss about 
balanced diet . So it is like sam e as when we go for exercisin g or even like when your health is 
not go down when we want to become a healthy person . When we do we go for best when we go 
to the nutritionist and ask them to provide us with what will be the best dietary routine that I can 
follow . So it will be  consider ed as a balanced diet it will provide me all the calories required for 
my all the aerobic respiration process  to finish .  And also it will surplus me with some additional amount of , calorie additional amount of meals 
to which w ill be stored in my muscles o r in my stored in different parts of my body . So that i s 
how the balance diet is actually been developed . Same way when we go for culturing a fish or 
culturing an aquatic species you have to develop a balanced diet .  
So aquacul ture in general when  we go fo r high density indoor farming  or say like in a confined 
cages you have to involve with the balanced diet or proper complete diet you have to supply . 
Otherwise what will happen it will be it will be like lack of  nutrient that av ailable for them  for to 
survi ve for you because like see you are anyway you a re culturing them in captivity . When you 
are culturing them in captivity it  does no t have any access to natural  the food system .  
So what it will do it is completely relying on th e supply by you by t he produc er, by the farm 
owner . So that i s why this feed , it has to have like all the essential nutrients possible for your  fish 
to have . So that is how the , that is how it is to be maintained , that is how the , that is why 
complete diet  or the balance  diet is neces sary for your aquatic plant and for your aquatic species 
and for proper development of your farm .  
In general when we  go for this outdoor raceways or the within ponds we only go for the 
supplementary diet sometimes . Because supplement diet do not possess all the required vitamins 
or minerals but only use the supply ex tra carbohydrate protein and lipid. Carbohydrate is not 
much important for as a fish me al but protein and lipids it.  I will  discuss about in a de tail say 
how does it how does all these  things  matter .  (Refer Slide Time: 09:45)  
 
So in general complete diet used by most of the fish farmers it includes in general this is in 
general I am  talking about it is like protein is like 18 to 50 percent lipid  is like 10- 25, 
carbohydrate 15 to 20 , ash conten t like m less than 8.5 preferably phosphorus less than 1.5 . 
Water content should be less than 10 percent as well it depends upon the type of  the pellet or the 
type of feed . Vitamin and minerals in trace amounts but optimal all the v itamin essent ial 
vitamin s and minerals has to be there .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:19)  
 So let u s talk about the individual components in nutrients in general . Just to give you a 
perspective about how fish feed is form ulated what are the essential nutrients that it requir es and 
like why it is important for their  for their healthy being , for making them a healthy being . First 
thing is the protein and amino acids , I think you already know , this is the most important and 
most expensive component of aquafeed .  
Because this is the sourc e which we are getting from either fish feed or algal feed or like micro 
algal or m acro algal feeds in general . So this is the source that we normally extract from other 
fishes or oth er living beings only it is like mostly possible from the living  being. A nd because of 
that it makes it a very costly product or costly component of aquatic feed .  
So in general proteins are formed by the peptide bond linkage of individual amino acids , so this 
amino acids are the unit of protein . So there are more than  200 amin o acids occur in nature 
however 20 amino acids are common or the kind of essential for us . But for fishes it is some 
around only 10 amino acids which are considered to be essential fo r fishes .  
What are these essential amino acids methionine , threonine , the phenylalanine , arginine , lysine , 
etcetera . So these are the very essential  amino acids which are very much responsible or very 
much needed when we are supplying feed to them .  
(Refe r Slide Time: 12:05)  
 So average protein level in the aquatic f eed, it differs from species to spe cies. For shrimp it can 
be 30 to 35 , catfish 28 to 32 , tilapia 35 to 40 , for trout and many fishes can go as high as 45 
percentage . So for them you ha ve to provide them with a very high content high amount of 
protein in t he formulated feed. For herbivorous as well as for the omnivorous fish the protein 
requirements are literally like typically lower than the carnivorous fish in general .  
However , it can  be higher for fish cultured in high density systems likely recirculato ry 
aquaculture syst ems in comparison to the low density culture systems . Why? because in high 
density you they are completely relying on your food on your systems on your feedi ng behavior 
and all . But in terms of low density culture they are still relaxed they are still in l ess stress 
condition and less relaxing in a relaxed condition .  
So that is  why the recirculatory aqua culture  system does require very hi gh quantity of  balanced 
diet which contains huge amount of protein at least much higher than compared  to the low 
density cult ure systems . Fish meal , fish hydrolysate , soybean meal , skim milk powder , wheat 
gluten and the legumes are excellent sou rces of pro tein used in the aquafeed. S o these are the 
source that we normally use for as a protein source for t he aquafeed  formulation that you may 
remember you can think you these are the very standard sources actually .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:34)  
 So this table actually is showing you the requirement of protein for different fish species  as per 
the Nates e t al 2015. I will  share it with the  paper also in the reference section at the last at the 
end of this lecture that ho w this different , if you go ahead  with this paper you can understand , 
you can really not a note down for when suppose you culture a specific type  of culture species 
and what will be the requirement for its protein . So based on that you can formulate your feed or 
you can choose your feed f rom the available market products .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:17)  
 
In general the essential amino acids like this a rginine , histidine , leucine , lysine , all this valine 
and etcetera. S o all these cases the requirement in general it lies between say like the ra nges are 
given it is in their unit in gram per 100 gram of protein . So say like you are providing them 100 
gram of feed out of them 40 gram i s protein in general it has to have out of those 40 gram .  
So if you can you can use the unitary method to find out  what will be the concentration of amino 
acid arginine amino acid what will be the concentration of lysine what will be the concentration 
of threonine what will be the concentration of the  valine etcetera . So this is the , this is a very in 
gene ral one .  (Refer Slide Time: 15:03)  
 
In this chart it is given more in depth and more  accurate va lues that  is found out by  the FAO in 
there in the source is  also given you can check it  I will  show you in the reference section you can 
take a picture or yo u can go ahead  with the google it and get all the details of .  
Suppose you a re targeting a Japanese  eel when you a re targeti ng to culture a Japanese  eel what  
will be the concentration of arginine , histidine , isole ucine, leucine, lysine etcetera . And exact 
values are already given so this is the standard value and optimized value that is true that should 
be there in your formula ted feed  in your feed and to supply i t for the balanced diet composition .  (Refer Slide Time: 1 5:46)  
 
 
Second thing is the lipids and the fatty acids . There are  compounds of lipids , there are 
compounds of fat and oils and the grea t, actually it greatly varies in terms of composition and th e 
nutrient amounts . In general it is a very concentrated so urce of energy fat has a very high source 
of energy it can be as high as 9.44  kilo calorie per gram .  
If you convert to the kilo joule it is like around 40 kilo, 39.5 kilo joule per gram of energy that it 
can per gram of dry wei ght it  can supply that . This is a very high , actually this is a one of the 
major source of ener gy for  the aquatic species , which is like almost 2.25 fold higher than the carbohydrate sourc e. What are the neutral lipid concentration  lipid those are available ? The fatty 
acids , triglyceride , glycerols , sterols , alcohols or waxes, etcetera . The polar lipids , the glycerol 
glycolipids , the glycero phospholipids etcetera . So this are the type diff erent type of the class of 
lipid that is ma ndatory for your , is to be availa ble to your fee d so that they will be supplied with 
ample amount of this pe ak concentration  there i s like this particular lipid concentration .  
In general oil are obtained from the  marine fish like menhaden and all . However , the vegetable 
soils are also co mmon source , like sunflower oil , canola, and linseed oil are also a very common 
source of  lipid for the aquatic for aqua feed formulation . Typically  fish requires omega -3 and 
omega -6 fatty acids . However , the fatty acids ca n further be classified into thre e different types , 
first one is saturated fatty acids or in short we call SFS.  
It does  not have any double bond okay if you go for this chemical composition it does not  have 
any d ouble bonds in it . Second is polyunsaturate d or PUFA we call it polyunsatura ted fatty acids 
it has more than two  number of double bonds . Third is highly unsaturated fatty acids or HUFAS 
or in general we call it in general it does have more than four number  of double bonds .  
So when this is in gener al classification  of fatty acids . So you have to remember the saturated 
fatty acids polyunsaturated and highly unsaturated fatty acids . So SFS, PUFA s and HUFA s. It is 
very important for you to remember this termin ologies it will be useful for you . And in g eneral 
fish oils like when it is coming from a marine source , like menhaden and it is excellent source of 
lipids and very rich , more than 30 percent of it contains omega -3 HUFAs,  omega -3 highly 
unsaturated fatty a cids.  
So in case of aquatic species or say  like omega 3 PUFAs  are more impo rtant than omega 6 
HUFA s. So omega 3 is important but omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid is much important than 
omega 6 polyunsaturated fatty acids . Fresh water fish do not need HUFAs. If you a re culturing 
fresh water fish it can survive without the presen ce of highly unsaturated fatty acids .  
Why I will  tell you in soon , I will  tell you so on. In general they are often , but often they require 
the linoleic acid in general , linolenic  acid in quantities like 0.5 to 1.4 percen t of the dry diet. And 
why they do not need HUFA s? They have enough delta 5 and delta 6  desaturated or elongase  activities these are the kind of enzymatic activities which are responsible for the PUFA s or 
linoleic a cid to be fulfill the requirement of the HUFA s.  
So in the only if you can supply it with the polyunsaturated fatty acids and the linolenic acid it is 
more than enough for the freshwater fish to survive . However for marine  fish for the sea water 
fish you h ave to supply it with HUFA s as well .  
(Refer Slide Time : 19:50)  
 
I will  tell you in detail . So marine fish it needs essential omega -3 fatty acids like the 
eicosapentaenoic acids and  docosahexaenoic acid. So because they lack in , they lack the 
necessary en zyme system to elongate and desaturate th e C18 fatty ac ids like linolenic acid. So 
linolenic acid is only available , only should be available for the freshwater  target species .  
But in case of marine culture you do no t have to go ahead  with the  linolenic a cid. Rather you can 
go ahead  with, you ne ed to supply w ith the different omega -3 fatty acids . Typically it requires 
omega -3 HUFA for optimal growth and health  at quantities like around 0.22 percent of their dry 
weight . Phospholipids in fish larval diets im proves the  growth and survival of the larva a nd it  
enhances the feed utilization , reduces the food conversion ratio and enhance the protein 
efficiency ratio .  
You know w hat is food conversion ratio ? It is a amount of food that you  are supplying on 
amount o f food that is converted into its biomass tha t it actually utilized that is  called the food conversion ratio . Same way protein efficiency ratio , the protein that it consumes in gram and the 
body weight gain in grams is this ratio , body weight gain in grams  divided by protein consumed 
in grams is call ed th e protein efficiency ratio . So it means the amount of protein that is actually 
being utilized and to the protein that is supplied .  
So this ratio is called the protein efficiency ratio . This can be highly i ncreased if you are 
supplying with the differ ent k ind of phospholipids and all . Algal ions and the marine fish are 
naturally very high in omega three HUFA s as I already told you and so these are excellent source 
for making the fish diets , for whom , for mar ine species itself  because they only need the  HUFA s.  
Lipids from other sources are deposited into fish muscle and when consumed by humans these 
fillets are act as a rich source of omega -3 fatty acids providing benefits like very improved  
cardiovascular he alth and also reduce the depressio n and different ot her anxiety related problems 
and all. This is only a very few examples that I can give at this moment there are other  beneficial 
benefits as well .  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:04)  
 
This is the very in details about the essential fatty acids re quirement of some juvenile and the 
sub-adult freshwater and the diadromous fish . I hope you guys know what is diadromous fish . 
Diadromous fish is like  like with the com bination of anadromous and catadromous  fish. 
Anadromou s fish if I give you a n example  hilsa  fish.  So how it is very famous in Bengal  and this particular part of the , particular part of the India . 
What is this hilsa fish? Why they are called anadromous ? Because they normally they normally 
stay in a sea water or they surely reason like I mean lik e they normally survive in a high salinity  
water . They normally survive , they normally dwell in a high saline water .  
But whenever they want to spawn or they want to hatch the egg or like the hatchling their , one 
the ve ry starting period of their life is a ctually being spent in the fresh water . So they can go up 
to a like say like around  up to  500 to 600 , even thousand kilometer upstream to the river to  lay 
egg. So this is called the anadromous type of anadromous type of  fish which survives i n seawater 
but their starting life starts in the fresh water .  
Same way there is another time of type of fish which we call this catadromous . Catadromous like 
American  eel. They normally survive in fresh water , they normally stay in f resh water , they 
norma lly dwell in fresh  water , but when the time spawning comes they go to the sea water to lay 
eggs. And there are different scientific reasons behind it there is kind of there are different 
biological  the reasoning behind it I am not goi ng into details you ca n Google it you ca n think you 
can search for , it will definitely enlarge your idea  knowledge about these systems . 
So this different kind of diadromous species and different freshwater features is given  this their 
essential fatty acid requirement .  
(Refer S lide Time: 24:02)  
 The further details are given on the some larva and the juvenile fishes quantitative fatty acid 
requirement . And for the fresh water in the left side for the in the first two fishes and there is 
marine fishes . So this is only for you to  understand the pe rcentage of like HUFA s or the PUFA s 
or the SFS that is required for them to survive .  
And the percen tage is very important when you a re targeting a specific type of culture species for 
your farm or for your hatchery for like for your farm . So you have to r emember you have to 
study this like what is the exact amount of fatty acids that it requires and how you utilize them in 
your fish  for the feed that you formulated .  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:49)  
 
The third thing is lik e the carbohydrates . Carbohydrates like starch and sugar are the least 
expensive source of energy used in fish diet . But they actually kind of act as a binding activity 
during the aqua feed manufacturing which reduces actually the feed cost also .  
So but ho wever it cannot provid e them , it is not very high efficient because i t can only extract let 
us say like around 1.6 calorie per one gram of carbohydrate which is like nothing . In case of 
dietary structures that are used for the extrusion manufacturing of th e floating feeds,  they are 
normally used . The carbohydrates like non -starch polysaccharides are also readily used for 
manufacturing aquafeeds  and all .  (Refer Slide Time: 25:29)  
 
So this is this is the this is the table that you can follow for non-starch  polysacchari de content 
that it require s per gram like gram per gram kg of dry matter . For different ingredients are also 
given like these ingredients like what is the starch content dietary fibers , soluble and the non -
soluble  non-starch polysaccharide con tent and the total non -starch polysaccha ride content which 
is present in various ingredients used for making the fish feed .  
And you just collect this particular feed , collect this particular components ingredients for 
making your fish feed based on your f ish demand ba sed on your aquatic species  demand and all .  (Refer Slide Time: 26:06)  
 
So in conclusion I can say the complete diets are used by mostly the fish farmers including the 
protein , 18 to 50 percent , lipid, carbohydrate , ash, phosphorus , water , vitamins and e ssential 
minerals , etcetera . Proteins are the most expensive ones but most important one . Lipid are the 
concentrated source of energy and which is like 2.25 more energy than the carbohydrate .  
And what are the type of lipid it requires , it dep ends on the m arine species or the freshw ater 
species . Catadromous or anadromous species based on their dwelling nature and all . 
Carbohydrates like starch and sugar are least expensive  source of energy used in fish source and 
their released utilizabl e energ y sources as well .  (Refer Slide Time: 26: 48) 
 
So what is the take away message from this lecture material?  We got to know about the 
nutritional content of the feed . What are the essential ingredients that it requires ? What are the 
different prote ins wha t are the different amino acids that it req uires ? What are the basic 10 amino 
acids which are important for the fish growth ?  
We got to know about the omega -3 and omega -6 fatty acids like that normally fish requires . We 
got to know about the differe nt type  of fatty acids like unsaturated HUFA s, PUFAS and SFS and 
how they can be  they can be utilized based on the type of the culture species .  
And carbohydrate like the starch and sugar can also be utilized sometimes they use to bind the 
feed material so  which will be which will reduce the cost of feed . But it is non -expensive and 
unlike it  is with the least expensive and least utilizable sources of energy for the fish diet .  (Refer Slide Time: 27:42 ) 
 
So we got to know a lot of information from this  lecture m aterial about the fish feed formulation 
and this is the reference that you can follow . You can take a picture of it and you can Google it 
will give you more in details the idea about how it works and all . So that is  it for today we  will 
meet again i n the n ext lecture video . Thank you so much .  