Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
India n Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 20  
Introduction to Crab Culture  (Continued)  
Hello, welcome everyone my name Gourav Dhar Bhowmick from the agriculture  and food 
engine ering  department of IIT Kharagpur . Today I will  be discussing about the introduction 
of crab culture which is like continuation of the last lecture only and this is the last lecture 
from this module technol ogy of crustacea  farming for this course advanced aquaculture 
technology .  
(Refer Slide Time 00:48)  
 
The concept s that I will  be covering  in this particular lecture would be like the box culture 
and the vertical recirculated aquaculture system type of mud  crab farming,  remember earlier 
we have already discussed two of them and this is the third and the fourth type of farming 
systems that we will  be discussing today .  
The site selection for the mud crab culture , what will be the optimum site what the optimum 
criteria for selecting a site for aquaculture for a mud trap culture , soil and water requirement , 
harvesting of mud crab, packing and tying of crabs after the harvesting is done , strategies to 
manage the cost  and the increase income from mud crab culture . Other than that, the 
constraints of mud crab  farming in India  and how to  troubleshoot them .  (Refer Slide Time: 01:45)  
 
In general,  you remember we already discussed two of the mud crab  farming techniques and 
so this is the third one the box culture that we will  be discussing today . It is an i nnovative and 
it is actually a very standard methods now even in India  also people are going for it this kind 
of culture systems where an innovativ e capital -intensive  box culture method are shown 
instead of in for the crab grow out and it is like much better than the grow out techniques that 
we normally follow that are there for this crab  culture . In this kind of systems the fattening is 
largely done  whereas the growout is carried out in a lesser scale . So, mainly it is like a 
mixture of grow out techniques and the fattening techniques but mostly in the fattening 
techniques .  
So, fattening techniques is mostly done like largely done and and a grow out  is done in a 
lesser scale , so fattening in box cages for a 200 gram crab  just for example results in a 25 to 
50 gram weight in a single month , so which continues for 9 to 10 months in a year . Just 
imagine it will give you a large amount of economic benefi t or for this kind of culture 
systems and when growout culture is carried out then the crabs  obtained from the nurseries  
are stocked in boxes at a rate of like one crab  per box and is culture for 4 to 6 months to attain 
around 300 to 900 gram of weight for  this species .  (Refer Slide Time: 03:21)  
 
So, what are the advantages and the disadvantages of this kind of systems ? First of all, box 
culture it involves very low maintenance , ease of assessment and the predictability . It can be 
carried out indoors usi ng the flow through or the recirculated  aquaculture systems where 
there is a scarcity of land and water , because it is in the box and you can just have a proper 
system , proper conduit line available for it and you can have a flow through system , you can 
utilize the flow through systems or you can utilize some additional bio filter to treat the water 
and put it back again . So, that is  called that is under the recirculated  aquaculture system that 
we call , so that way also you can go  ahead and you c an utilize the water more as much as 
possible .  
By this way you can reduce the overall water demand of the systems and also you can reduce 
the environmental impact . What are the disadvantages of this kind of system is like it requires 
a high capital invest ment in general  because of you need  some equipment s ome box in 
general for each crab  you have to have a single box for it .  
Lower activity of crab culture it reduces their metabolism and subsequent feed intake because 
they have a very limited space to dwell and their metabolism rate goes down and the 
subsequent feed intake also becomes down and which definitely have a proper imp act on 
their mea t on their biomass . So, other than that the lower activity of the cultured crab along 
with the constant exposure to the sunlight it results in an algae infestation sometimes .  
That is a major issue sometimes we have to worry about it and so metimes people put a proper 
kind of what we call it like proper you can do this painting anti-foulent and all , you can paint 
the boxes s o that it will be very difficult for the bar to attach to its surface , so because of that we can go for different techni ques there are like thousands of techniques for this 
antibio foulent  and painting . So, not only the antibiofoulent but also like this algae also they 
can also be infested , so how to get rid of it there are thousands of technique available with it 
but still it needs some capital cost so it does not  make sense and that is  why sometimes it is 
one of the disadvantages part of this box culture .  
(Refer Slide Time 05:52)  
 
It looks lik e this if you see this box single crab is  there are in the same box and hanging from 
a bamboo structure,  they will be almost half dipped or like full dipped inside the water or 
sometimes even a little bit of the above the water is also if the water level goes down for one 
or two days because like they can survive with it .  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:25)  
 In case of v ertical r ecirculatory aquaculture systems it is actually emerging technology that is 
coming out where it involves the bio filters , sand filters , UV filters which all are connected to 
each other via specially desi gned vertically stacked mud crab  boxes . What they do they treat 
the water so that it will get rid of the , once  that water is utilized then the water is it is like a 
waste water , after the crab is  purchase,  it is like waste water that w astewater is again treated 
using all this filter mechanism , biofi lters, sand filter , UV filter it all has its definite properties 
or definite functionality .  
The biofilter why the bio filters are used , bio filters are mainly used to get rid of all the 
carbonacious  and the nitrogenous compound in general , which is a very  high in case of this 
cultural procedures and farming techniques . In order to get rid of the carbonacious  and the 
nitrogeno us species we go for biofilters  where the microorganisms are artificially grown 
which will consume this nitrogen and carbon from the wastewater for and they will develop 
their biomass and the water which is coming out of this bio filter are free of those nitrogen . It 
is not completely free they can reduce the load , pollutant load . Then if you talk about the 
sand filters in general we can put it before actually , so sand filters are for what purpose ?  
It will get rid of all the suspended solid present in your , so because of the high turbide water 
because it is a brackish water it generally has a very high repeatability.  So, these sand fi lters 
what they do they will reduce the suspended  solid level of this kind of water and at the end is 
why we we go for UV filter , just an example do  not go for it like it is only UV filter that you 
need to use you can use ozonator and all these things also  there are advanced oxidation 
techniques there are like lot of techniques , technology available in this field where those are 
mainly being used to reduce the microbial content what does that mean it will reduce the 
pathogenic concentration , pathogenic micr oorganism content in the water .  
So, the water which is after the treatment is done in this different treatment units then that 
water is again thrown back to the pond or the cultural system or so that what will happen you 
are reducing the overall water intake , because water comes with a price no matter if it is like 
a pumping system , it is a conveyance systems it comes with the price .  
So you are  reducing the water intake by all utilizing the same water over and over again , so 
that is  why it is called th e recirculatory aquaculture systems . Why it is called vertical , 
because you can design it vertically by some different filters at different stage put the water 
once it is done , once the water is utilized then you put the water , use the pump to the 
reservoi r from reservoir through gravity it will go through the different system different filters and it will again come to the pond itself , come to the the culture pond  itself or the 
culture tank itself .  
It ensures very strict control over the water quality as  I already mentioned and also facilitates 
the observation of the cultured crabs.  It is less affordable for the small farmers because of its 
high initial investment o r the capital investment , however there are a lot of policies that is 
available right now , the bank loans are available right now , government policies as  I told like 
it is available right now for which you can go ahead  with it. It will take  x amount of money 
you just  have to pay like 0.1 x or 0.2 x  by yourself .  
As a farmer you just have to make  sure you have that much of  amount then the rest of it will 
be covered by the banking system , by the government grants , because these are the 
techniques that government is trying to promote , the banks are very much ready to give you 
loan for this kind of s ystems and they are having with a very low interest loan or sometimes 
interest free loans also you will get it .  
So, you can use those opportunity and you can go ahead  with it , so there are a business 
strategy that you can develop if you want to go for this kind of crab culture in the in your 
village , in your like coastal region , in wherever you are , so you just want to go for that there 
are opportunities available .  
So, do no t just lose the hope that just because it is a high initial invo lvement involved with it 
you cannot do anything with it , you cannot do anything because of that . There are a lot of 
opportunities lies with it . In general,  the vertically stacked mud crab  boxes installed in pond  
systems along with the lifting and sinking m echanisms can be less expensive and innovative 
alternatives for the farmers .  (Refer Slide Time 11:12)  
 
 
This is vertical recirculatory  aquaculture system type of mud crab box culture if you see , so 
all this box are actually contains the crops and there we have either vertical or maybe 
horizontal systems which are involved with it . In general,  the site selection if you ask me 
before starting a mud  crab culture what are the basic things very important parameters that 
you have to look for before going forward designing your firm . The first thing will come into 
your mind is like the site selection;  definitely we go for that thing first like where are we 
going to  build our farm . For this mud crab  culture those like mangrove areas which are 
sheltered from the strong waves and the winds should be selected .  
Why I say so, if you go to Sunderban, it has a very nice mangrove  belt in its southern part the 
moment i t reaches its like where the land in the coastal regions , so this mangrove areas are actually very enriched and they enriched with the proper site available , proper quality of soil , 
proper quality of the sea water , proper quality of saline  water available for the mud crab 
culture.  What you need to do , you need to select the site properly , so you have this proper 
mangrove region what they are doing , they are reducing they are kind of energy dissipating 
structure .  
When the sea waves are coming it will disabl e it will reduce the wave energy by crashing on 
them , so what will happen , these mangroves  are actually helping to this reduce the land 
erosion not only that it will help to grow like the other side of the mangrove area you can 
utilize it for your site for growing your mud crab along .  
In general,  you just go for a safe and secure area so that there are a less chances of stealing 
your product or farm products.  Mainly you should go for the unpopulated area why  it is to be 
selected because it can prevent the runoff or the past pesticides or the fertilizers from the 
local firms . The pens should be located away from the sources of fresh water or the runoff 
radius , the pens should also be placed in areas that allow  them to be partially submerged at 
low tides and also support a good fresh  sea water flow all the time .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:59)  
 
The requirement of the mud crab  culture , the soil quality if  I talk about the soil quality 
definitely you should go for the Sandy -clay or the sandy soil it is the most suitable soil type 
for the mud crab  culture the reason because sandy bottom they dejects the borrowing, so that 
is what they do this mud crab, so we ha ve to have a proper s andy clay or the  proper sandy 
soil in your system .  The water requirement the brackish water is the most ideal for crab fattening  as scylla  serrata 
has it is very much tolerant they can be easily tolerable to , they are actually tolerant to  the 
wide range of saline  conditions and you see like optimum range can be a from 15 to 30 ppt 
which is like very high . So, it can be as low as the like normal brackish water to even 
standard seawater also it can easily sustain , it can easily survive .  
Other than that, the water temperature has  to be around 23 to 32 degrees Celsius,  water depth 
has to be more than 80 centimeter in general , the DO concentration which is like dissolve 
oxygen concentration has to be more than 4 PPM for sure or the 4 milligram per liter for sure , 
pH slightly basic range 8 to 8.5 is perfect for them to grow .  
(Refer Slide Time 15:19)  
 
Pond preparation on the management , if we talk about the small tidal ponds  of around like 
0.025 to 0.1  hectare you have to choose with the 0.5 to 1-meter  depth of water should be 
there at least . The pond  bottom must be sandy to prevent any borrowing , the bunds  should 
have a minimum width of one meter at the top and also as crabs have a tendency to escaping  
by borrowing through the bunds  so you have to have as thick bound as possible so they 
cannot escape very easily .  
The risk of crab escape by climbing over the bunds  can be stopped by fixing the overhanging 
fins incline towards the pond. Fencing of height around 0.5 meter to one meter should be 
done over the dyke  using the materials like bamboo sticks , fiberglass , asbestos sheets , etc. So, 
if you are  rich enough go for asbestos seeds and fiberglass , definitely it is not possible for 
them to  for your culture  crab to escape from your system .  So, use of this sluice  gets fitted with the bamboo screens to prevent the  crab escape and to 
regulate the flow of tidal water , so the sluice  gate when it opens at the end it touch with the 
bamboo screens , so the bamboo screens are always there , so moment the sluice gate  will open 
still the bamboo screens are there , because of bamboo screens water will come in or water 
will go out in the drainage channel or incoming sea water but the crabs which is there in  your 
farming  it cannot escape through it .  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:02)  
 
Also,  after draining out the water it should be properly dried before liming to prevent the 
entry of any pathogen or pathogenic microorganisms and just remember for pathogens is the 
one like which is harmful microorganisms for that particular type of species . So, which is 
pathogen , the pathogenic mechanisms for us may not be pathogen for other kind of culture 
species alone , so it depends upon the species to species .  
The stocking during  the mud crab culture for better yield, monoculture is preferred in general 
but you can go for a poly culture as well it will give you higher return . Soft shell  crab with 
like more than 9-centimeter  width of carapace or crabs having more than 575 gram of weight 
should be stocked and stock intensity can be in between 1 to 3 crabs per square meter .  
Well it depends upon the what type of culture if you go for cage culture it can be as high as 
10 grams p er square meter which will definitely increase your productivity like anything , so 
that is  why people are started going for the cage culture nowadays for crab farming.  In terms 
of feed management the crabs are fed daily with the trash fish or the bivalve  meat, boiled 
chicken waste , brackish water clams  at 5 to 10 percent of their body weight , so they are really 
non-vegetarian mostly , but they are actually okay with the vegetarians I mean the plants as well so if you can provide them with the proper plant materials which they normally prefer to 
have they will definitely have it .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:38)  
 
So, but make sure that it is at least 5 to 10 percent of the body weight of feed is always 
available for them to have for their normal growth and physic al benefits . So, in general if you 
see the the stage of their rearing from this zoea stage from Z1 stage or we call it zoea 1, zoea 
2, zoea 3, zoea 4, zoea 5 to Mega lopa to crab instruct to the maturation stage .  
So, all these stages at different stages their feeding habits can be different you just do  not go 
for fishes on the very first day they cannot just have it . They can have it they can grow very 
easily if there is like rotifiers available;  they have the artemia s available at a certain stage 
after couple of days . This artemia seeds they can have it , these Branch shrimps and all they 
can have it and they can grow very fast because of this animal protein . Then you can have the 
formulated diet with a proper dependin g upon the size of the your like farming  species , you 
can go for this nanochl orum and all you can water replacement is also important based on 
their maturation stage .  
So, in general 30 to  60 percent every 5 days is recorded the initial days but it can be reduced 
down to up to 50 percent at the later stage because they do not  create much of a pollutants at 
the end because well theoretically they should but actually the area which we normally 
provide them with is also very  high,  the volume which provide them with is also high at the 
later stress so because of that the volume requirement for the fresh water exchanges become s 
reduced a little bit . The salientary requirement is also around 30 to 3 2 ppt at the max and it 
can be 24 to  30 ppt in the later stage as well.  (Refer Slide Time 20:32)  
 
So, once everything is done the  crab breaches its mature stage , how to harvest it ? You need to 
harvest it from the system . So, there are different methods available for harvesting of mud 
crabs . The mud crabs are normally harvested by hardening their shell and just before their 
next maulting  season . It is done by using the scooping nets or by simply hand picking if  you 
have a small farm.  It is recommended to pick the crabs includes like in gener al the early in 
the morning or evening where they are less active . The crabs  are then washed to remove any 
dirt particles then their legs are tied carefully without breaking and injuring them I will  show 
you how to tie it in later slides . After harvesting they should be kept in a moist condition 
away from the direct sunlight so it might have a negative effect on their survival .  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:26)  
 So, i n general,  we use the twin e or raffia  or a strip of fibrous forest vines used for to restrain 
the crab with their leg and claws held beside and under the body . The mud crabs should be 
submerged and washed in basin  sea water for say two to three minutes before the packing . 
Then it is arranged , the crabs  are arranged neatly in a woven coconut leaf baske ts or the 
carto ns during the packing of such that the  swimmerets  are placed downwards with the face 
and the claws are facing upwards .  
So, after arranging the crabs, they are covered using the mangrove leaves and wet cloths to 
maintain the moisture an d if you want to sold it far far away it will go for more than a week 
of transportation then the crabs  must be sprinkled with sea water after every 2 to 3 hour or at 
least you have a provision to drop the sea water from the above after every 2 to three 3 or it 
will keep on dropping at a regular manner . So, you have to arrange that situation , arrange that 
mechanism or system .  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:24)  
 
So, in general the secure and the safe tying of crabs  how it is done ? You see the pictures very 
carefully like how we tie the crabs so that it will not be having any negative impact on their 
livelihood , on their life during the transportation . So, we will  start with the rope on the 
underside  of the  crab and we will  put both of its swimmerets,  both ends between  the 
swimmeretes  and the third walking leg towards the carapac e.  
Next, we will  flip the  crab over on the other side now , we will wind each end of the rope 
around each claw of the  crab twice , one or two times both of its claws  and then we will pull it 
towards the swimmerets under the third walking leg of the crab . Just look at the third picture 
now, so now we will pull the rope above the swimmer ets and tie the knot firmly at the bottom . So, by this way we normally  go for the se cure tying of crab s. Once the secure tying 
of crabs  are like we tie the crabs properly then it is ready to transport very easily forl 
transportation purpose even for the long duration as well .  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:50)  
 
In case of pickup or delivery takes more than a day the crabs  must be submerged for an hour 
in a basin of fresh sea water and then are covered in a wet cloth to retain the moisture . So, it 
looks like this if you see it clearly , so it looks like this from th e picture the figure 5 that you 
can see the packed mud crabs how it looks like .  
(Refer Slide Time 24:14)  
 
There are the strategies to manage the cost and increase the income from mud crab  culture . 
This is very important for whoever is very much interested and maybe you are in the bachelor stage or master stage but you are interested in future to go and becoming an entrepreneur by 
yourself , so you have to abide by some strategies to manage the cost fo r your farm.   
So, proper maintenance of the mud crab fa rm must be ensured to avoid any unnecessary 
expenses towards repairs , you have to design the dykes  accordingly , the pond  bottom 
accordingly so that the type of soil that you are  providing them with lik e it has to be proper 
culture system , the proper fencing , the width , the water salinity , the quality of water , all these 
things has to be properly maintained .  
The farm surrounding must be checked very regularly and protected from the damages . 
Number of mud crabs fattening  the pens should be increased . The mortality of the mud  crab 
can be reduced by carefully handling and consistently feeding the crabs , you  can increase the 
yield of mud  crab using proper fattening process and effective harvesting  procedures .  
You can maintain the regular restocking of pens  by selling the crabs . So, what you can do 
you can just develop a procedure in such a way so that you will have a production year wise  
round . Suppose you are introducing the crabs  in your system and you know that after 3 
months or after  4 months it will reach the maturation stage .  
So, after every week you start structuring the system , so after every weeks if you start 
structuring the system  from the beginning of the from the commencement of your farm after 
four months you will get the first return after , one week you will  get the second return the 
moment you will  get the first return you will  replace it with the zoea crabs  again . So, you will 
keep on getting the benefits  year long because it depen ds upon the structure and especially in 
the pen culture it is doable because you do not  have to worry about much of  water , no water 
exchange, it is done automatically .  (Refer Slide Time: 26:32)  
 
You just need to provide them with the feed if it requires and definitely it requires because 
you are sometimes we go for a semi -intensive or even intensive also definitely to require so 
you just provide them with the proper food so to have a higher higher economic benefit and 
that is  it. In general,  if you see the Scylla  species there are three types of parameters that we 
discussed here about like the three types of cultural species  culture we discuss monoculture , 
polyculture and the fattening .  
If we go fo r monoculture it can go like culture period is like around 120 days , polyculture 
138 days , fattening  is around 30 days , the production around maximum is around in case of 
polyculture definitely because you are also getting some milkfish out of it in it is for this 
particular study but if you are  gonna go for this kind of polyculture you will get a lot of 
benefit because utilizing the same p ond, same fa rm you will  get two or three species together .  
So, why not to go for that it will definitely increase you r income and it will provide you with 
the higher net profit as you can see from the last row, the net profit per crab  it is like in rupees 
which is around 2,12,800 . This is just a symbolic figure , this is just an example from a 
particular study , this is no t representing the actual values I  am again saying this is not 
representing the actual values this is just to give you an idea about why to go for this 
polyculture systems . If you go for this polyculture systems you can have a milkfish , you can 
have a praw n in the same system same unit and you can double your income .  (Refer Slide Time: 28:19)  
 
So, what are the constraints of mud crab farming in India , largely depends on the collection 
of wild seeds thus posing a threat to the wild population that is  a major problem , a lack of 
commercial feed mills along with the absence of dedicated mud crab feed manufacture 
compel  to the farmers to use the low-cost fresh feed.  
So, in India  there should be a proper crab fish crab feed manufacturing units , so you can 
easily imagine the demand of this kind of system , this kind of technologies in near future so 
you just need to find out what is the correct composition of the feed that mud crab would like 
to have and based on that you just make a proper arrang ement and just make the feed and just 
make it  as a business model and then you can go ahead  with it .  
There is a lot of future in the research and also in the entrepreneurship point of view in case 
of mud crab  farming in India . The one of the disadvantages  of low-cost fresh feed is includes 
it is like very fast spoilage and their need to over storage facilities and because of that it is not 
a good choice sometimes in it can cause a lot of harm for the local farmers and a lot of in 
terms of economic return .  (Refer Slide Time 29: 24) 
 
So, what we have discussed in this lecture in general we discussed about the methods like 
box culture and the vertical RAS  systems for crab farming , we discussed about the important 
consideration for the site selection , soil and water requirements , what is the harvesting 
procedures , packing and tying of crabs after the harvesting is done , what are the strategies to 
manage the cost and the constraints of farming in India  and what are the troubleshooting 
measure that we can adapt for this kind of techniques .  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:02)  
 
So, if you ask me what are the takeaways for today's lecture it is like the box culture methods 
which is a type of farming where the fattening  is largely done whereas the grow out  is carried 
out in a lesser scale . Box culture includes the low maintenance , easy assessment , predictability and the high initial capital investment , but this high capital investment can be 
somehow neutralized by higher economic return as well . Vertical RAS crab culture is 
emerging technology specially designed for the indoor environment .  
So, to increase the productivity you do not  have to depend upon the oceanic environment or 
depend upon the coastal region . It is recommended for the harvesting of the crabs inc ludes 
early in the morning or the evening and it is very important and also what are the techniques 
and strategies that we can go  ahead in this particular field in India n context and how to 
troubleshoot them .  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:59)  
 
So, these are the references that it is very important literatures that you can go  ahead and you 
can search for it and so to get some more information about it . So, t hat is, it for this module ; 
see you again , thank you .  