Advanced  Agriculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture  24 
Design  of Shrimp  Hatchery  
Hello  everyone,  welcome  to the fourth  lecture  of the module  5. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:30)  
 
So I am Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhomick.  I am from  the Department  of Agricultural  Food  
Engineering  from  IIT Kharagpur.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:38)  
 
So, in this particular  lecture  material  we will be discussing  the concepts  that I will be covering  
is the site selection  for shrimp  hatchery.  We have  already , we have  already  understood  what  
are the criteria  of site selection  for carp, prawns . Now  we were  discussing  about  the shrimp  
hatchery.  What  are the hatchery  systems  and types  that involves  with the shrimp  hatchery.  
What  are the facilities  and equipment  that it involves  and what  are the components  of shrimp  
hatchery.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:05)  
 
When  we talk about  the shrimp  hatchery,  it is that shrimp  is one of the most  valued  valuable  
fisheries  product  or aquacultural  product  in the world.  It is a reliable  supply  of and the shrimp  
hatchery  is the only source  and like say I would  say like one of the reliable  supply  of post larvae  
for pond  culture  even . But also for your even  for your farm  any kind of farm .  
So, when  we go for the different  types  of hatchery  systems  if we talk about  the types  of hatchery  
systems  generally  we follow  these  three  types  of hatchery  systems  key methods.  The Japanese  
method  where  the very low density  of hatchery  unit are available  like 10 larvae  per liter with a 
large  tank of around  say like 200 meter  cube  which  is like very high be like the size is very 
huge .  
Intensive  once  with a high density  of around  100 larvae  per liter with a small  tank around  like 
1 to 10 meter  cube,  which  is nowadays  becoming  more  how to select  sustainable  because  in 
terms  of landmass  use, in terms  of the electricity  use and all we have  to compromise  with some  
stuff maybe  we compromise  with the amount  of energy  requirement , we sometimes  
compromise  with the amount  of water  requirement  because  of its intensive  uses,  we have  to 
increase  the water  exchange,  but that can also be minimized  by using  other  troubleshooting  
measures  and all, anyway .  
So, the other  than that the intermediate  method  is also famous  which  takes  around  like around  
mean  density  of around  30 larvae  per liter with a medium  tank size of around  30 to 50 meter  
cube .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  02:46)  
 
In general  hatchery  they sell two products  mainly . First is the Naulpii  or the Nauplii.  The 
second  is the Postlarve.  So, the Nauplii  are the tiny newly  hatched  larvae  is the one which  is 
very famous  which  is sold which  is actually  sold to the specia lists who grow  them  to the post-
larval  stage  or to the farmers  who stock  them  into the nursery  pond at high density  and later 
transfer  them  into the grow -out pond  at lower  densities.  So, this is one of the major  product  of 
hatchery .  
Another  product  is like post-larvae,  definitely  if you go for the further  stage  and at the end you 
will get the post-larvae  and that you go throw  into that you directly  stock  it into your grow -out 
pond  or maybe  the nursery  pond  like it depending  on the size and the culture , anyway.  So, we 
go to the grow -out pond.   
In the grow -out pond,  it will reach  from  post-larval  stage  I mean  like from  the stay stage  to the 
say like mature  adult  stage  and ready  for you once  it reaches  the marketable  size it will transport  
it to the market  or will sell it to the market.  So, that is that this is that this is the very two 
products  that is available  that is the main  products  of any hatchery  especially  the shrimp  
hatchery.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  03:58)  
 
In general  the shrimp  hatchery  types  it is of small , medium  or large  scale  and the criteria  is like 
as I told you the local  influenced  by the local  tradition , building  materials , designed  production  
level , culture  species  and based  on all these  things  we go for the designing  of hatchery,  two 
designs  are of hatchery  mostly  we adopt  like the large,  large  tank ones and the small  tank ones.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  04:28)  
 
I do not want  to go in details  about  this slide  because  I have  again  I have  discussed  about  it in 
details  in last lecture  even  last to last lecture  also to remember  for carp hatchery , for prawn  
hatchery  also, these  are almost  the same  in case of shrimp  hatchery  also it also almost  shows  
the same  parameters  or almost  shows  the same  concerns  like the other  two with some  
additional , additional  points.   
Let me go through  it like very fast. Shrimp  hatchery  is like it is concerned  with the production  
of living  animals  that would  otherwise  be found  in their marine  and brackish  water  situation  
definitely.  And its special  consideration  that must  be given  towards  the selection  of his location  
is like the distance  from  ocean . How  does it matter?  Because  you have  a distance  if you have,  
like, the more  the distance  from  the ocean,  it will cost you more  the convenience , convince  
charge,  the more  the convince  charge  more  the pump  that it needs  to be used.  So, depending  
on that you have  this issues.  So, distance  it does matter .  
What is the second  thing  is the sea water  supply.  So, how you are supplying  your sea water,  I 
know  remember  we discussed  about  the supply  mechanism  in the last lecture.  It is like the 
same . Availability  of the spawners , availability  of the power  source , expansion  potential . 
Expansion  potential  is why it is important ?  
When  you suppose  design  a farm and you choose  a site suppose  you know  that you only have  
like say like 10 acre of site, 10 acre of land available  with you and all the land that is 
surrounding  to it is already  been  taken  and already  been  utilized  by some  high product , crop 
utilization  or say high product,  high residen cy building  and all the things  are there.  So, you 
cannot  expand  it.  
But however,  suppose  your product  has a very high market  value  and at the end you need  to 
have  it expanded , expanded  vertically  or horizontally.  So, you need  to think  about  the 
probability  or the like the possibilities  of vertical  or at least horizontal  extension  of your 
expansion  of your project  site. Other  than that the elevation  and the topography , freshwater  
supply , accessibility , climatic  condition,  definitely  these  are the very important  parameters.  I 
am not going  into details  you already  know  how does it matter  when  we design  a hatchery  site.  
Primary  concerns,  access  to the ocean  quality  sea water  and have  a constant  salinity  year-round , 
year-round  is very important.  If it fluctuates,  it will put a stress  on the on your target  species.  
Site selection  is the most  critical  step having  a significant  impact  in the profitability  of the 
business  that you are doing.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  7:18) 
 
Ample  space has to be provided  for rearing and the support  facilities  as well it is not that only 
you think  about  the designing  of your major  components  because  the support  facilities  like the 
office , lab, the other utilities  are very important,  then then only the actual  tank design  of 
different  designing  of say like larva l tank, post-larval  tank,  broodstock  pond , etc, etc, spawning  
incubators  and etc.  
So, what  are the essential  components  of a shrimp  hatchery , maturation  tank,  spawning  tank,  
larva l rearing  tank, live food culture  tank, water  storage  and filtration  tank, aeration,  sea water  
supply  and marine  pumps .  
Do we need  to discuss  about  it (())(8:04) ? You already  know  like maturation  stage,  maturation  
tanks  are the one where  we normally  suppose  like kept the broodstocks  we keep  the mature  
adults  which  are capable  enough  for further  off spring  production.  Then  we when  they reach  
the spawning  stage  we let them  rearing  the spawning  tanks  and where  they spawn  and we after 
the spawning  is done  the eggs are hatched  we collect  those  hatchlings  for this in the larvae  to 
the larva l rearing  tank from  there  we wait for it to be grow  to the or this to the actual  maturation  
stage .  
Live food culture  tanks  what  is algal  culture  tanks  or the Artemia  or rotifers  culture  tanks  and 
all, so these  are used for, these  are what  we considered  as live food culture  tank. Water  storage  
or filtration  tanks  is very important  where  we stored  the seawater  because  it is not possible  for 
us to go for 24, 7 pumping  water , you need  to store  the seawater  in a certain  up to a certain  
volume  for emergency  purposes  as well. So, that is very important  when  we design  a system  
you cannot  just simply  rely on your pumps  you have  to have  backup  always  ready  for you.  
First backup  is like an additional  pump  system , pumping  system.  Second  backup  is like 
additional  storing  system.  You just store  the water  when  the pump  is in running  condition  you 
store  as much  as possible  in your farming  area.  So that in case of any emergency  you can use 
that backup  water  for your for farming  your tank,  for farming  in your tank. Then  this aeration  
is very important  sea water  supply  and pumping  systems  we already  discussed  what  is marine 
pump,  we already  know .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  09:50)  
 
So, in case of maturation  tank,  which  is used for storing  the brooders , the shape  can be circular , 
rectangular  or oval in shape  and most  famous  one is circular  ones or the rectangular  one. 
Stocking  density  around  6 to 7 brooder  per square  meter  of 1 is to 1 ratio of male  and female . 
Tank capacity  about , of about  like say 5 to 40 tons of depth  ranging  from  1.2 to 2 meter .  
If the shrimps  are kept for less than 5 weeks , bottom  substrate  are not need , bottom  substrate  
are not needed  in a tank. Water exchange , constant  flow of 10 liter per minute  is required.  So, 
around  200 percent  is water  exchange  per day, can you imagine  200 percent age of water  
exchange  per day. So, which  is like say like if you are having  like 2 meter  cube  of small  tanks  
for each tank you have  to exchange  4 meter  cube  of water  each day.  
So, which  is a huge  amount  of water.  So, that is what  is a major  concern  you need  to really  
worry  about  in how to treat that water  and when  you put it back  into the system  rather  than 
throwing  it away  to surface  water  which  will cause  environmental  harm  as well. The 
temperature  20 to 30 degrees  Celsius  with a pH of around  7.8 to 8.5, salinity,  sea water  range  
26 to 32 and water  depth  of around  0.6 meter  is expected  to be in the in maturation  pond .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:06)  
 
Then there  comes  a spawning  tank.  So, from  brood fish tank or the spawning  tank,  you have  a 
collection  to the a collection  chamber  you see the airlift  pump,  we can provide  the bubble  
curtain  we can provide , the shape  should  be circular  with flat or conical  size. So, in general  
spawning  tank. So, it is not necessary  it can be circular  as well,  then you take the brooder  fishes  
and just let them  spawn  there, and after spawning  is almost  it is evident.  So, you just collect  
the egg from  through  the skin the water  will be taken  out and you can collect  the egg from  the 
from  the spawning  tank.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:50)  
 
So, often  I mean  like egg is (())(11:53) , when  it has those  as larvae s can be easily  corrected  
from  this spawning  this tank and then you put it in the small  tank systems  with like size of 
around  like 2 to 10 tons with a circular  or rectangular  or oval in shape . With a diameter  of 1.8 
meter  and 1.2 meter  in depth  with a central  double  cylinder  standpipe  drainage  system.  So it 
will be like water  will be coming  from  outside  and then once  it reaches  a certain  level  from  
inside  there  is a drainage  system.  So it will come  in the inside  cylinder  it will go down , and it 
will collect  like this. So, it will be like this double  cylinder  standpipe  drainage  system.   
Rectangular  tank of around  tank of around  1.5 by 5 by 1 meter  in size can be used with a 
drainage  pipe is set at the side of the tank and drain  pipe is used while  harvesting . In case of 
big tank systems  it can go as high as 2000  tons of capacity.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:47)  
 
The live food culture  system,  it is generally  of around  1 to 20 ton of tank capacity  like food 
tank capacity  of 20 percent  of total tank capacit y is the larva l rearing  is used for the larva l 
rearing.  In general  light is very important  because  your culturing  algae  here, in general.  So, 
other  than that, you can go for Artemia  culture  tank also but in general  when  we go for algae,  
so it is better  to provid e it with at least 1000  to 800 lux with a temperature  of around  24 to 26 
degrees  Celsius . Water storage  and filtration  as I already  told at least,  tank capacity  of at least 
20 percent  of total tank capacity  larval  rearing  has to be there,  has to be stored  as a water  storage  
for emergency  purposes.   
The treatment  before  use of seawater  you can settlement  of how we can how we can treat it the 
sea water  first of all, you can use a settleme nt of suspended  particles.  How  we can do that?  We 
can provide  it with different  kinds  of grid chambers.  We can provide  with some  this filtering  
mechanism  by sand filtration  and all.  
Then the chlorination  with around  5 ppm for like 6 hours,  which  is very important  to provide  
the chlorination  because  of suspended,  further  suspension  of suspended  particles  like, 
sedimentation  of suspended  particles  kind of how to say to cleansing  or for to get rid of all the 
foreign  micro  flora  and fauna  and then follow  up filtration  and then a dechlorination  and all 
because  any chlorine  based  product  or the residual  chlorine  that is present  there  is no, is actually  
harmful.  So, that also dechlorination  process  has also been  followed.  So, to clean  the all the 
residual  chlorine  concentration  and all the residue  chlorine  byproducts.  
Then the sea water  can be utilized  or sea water  can be used again  back  to the your for in the 
storage  tank. So once  the storage  tank is filled, once  the storage  tank is available  with the 
amount  of seawater  that it requires,  then it can be easily  utilized  for your how to say your tank 
again  with time.   
So, with, so this is a very important  para, these  are the very important  units  or the how to say 
the chambers  or the design  parameters , design  considerations  that we need  to have.  And when  
all these  things  like almost  they are equal  because  they are like not equal , almost  they are 
similar  carp hatchery,  prawn  hatchery  or the shrimp  hatchery,  but it all has its own specificness.   
Specificness  is, specificness  means , what  do I mean  by that?  I mean  like, suppose  you are 
culturing  a particular  type of carp, you culturing  a particular  type of shrimp ? Or suppose  you 
are culturing  particular  type of prawn  or say macrobrachium  Rosenberg,  or like we call them  
scampi.  So, if you go for this hatchery  of macrobrachium  Rosenberg,  which  is very famous  in 
actually  Indian  context,  Indian,  I mean,  like coastal  region  if you go, so there  what  they do. 
They  design  it accordingly.   
According  to the target  species,  they design  it according  to their requirement,  it is not always  
fixed,  there  are certain  changes  and certain  manipulations  that we do, depending  upon  the 
species  and after then we design  the farm . The major  information  that we need  to think  about  
at this moment  of time is the environmental  impact.  So, before  going  for any design , before  
going  for any finalization  of the farming  product  and all, you need  to think  about  the 
environmental  impact  and based  on that you have  to do it.  
If you do not do that, you simply  do not get the official  permission  or the how to say to go 
ahead  with the business  to go ahead  with your farm,  the official  permission  where  you can get 
the environmental  consideration  in terms  of environmental  point  of view,  you can get it from  
the central  pollution  control  board  CPCB,  you can get it from  the clean  Ganga  mission . So 
clean  Ganga  mission,  the government  of India,  it is a new regulatory  body.   
So, namami  Ganga , under  the namami  Ganga  project.  So, what  they do, they have  fixed  the 
criteria  of wastewater  discharge  into the Ganga , into the river  Ganga.  And the parameters  are 
actually  differs  from  species  to species.  But in general,  when  you are designing  a farm , the size 
of the farm  and the amount  of discharge  that you are actually  supplying  to your surface  water  
body  has to be well within  the limit.   So this limit  has to be maintained.  And not only the water  discharge  that here I am talking  
about,  I am discussing  about  the water  discharge  causing  harm  to the surface  water  as well as 
the ground  water . So, these  are the parameters  that you have  to really  think  about  it before  
going  for any designing .  
So, these  are the things  that we normally  do not care about  much,  even  10 years  back  also, but 
now,  these  are very important  parameters  that we have  to look after,  while  we design any kind, 
any forming , any farms, any of these  kinds  of farms .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:20)  
 
In general,  the hatcheries , in conclusion,  hatcheries  remain  the weak  link in the production  
cycle.  And like, feeding  of, the feeding,  the various  life stages , life stages  of developing  shrimp  
takes  a major  effort.  So, all these  parameters  can be well adjusted  well troubleshooted  in case 
of, in case of proper  designing  of hatchery . For all species,  the hatchery  technique  follows  the 
same  procedure  with specific , species  specific  parameter  and the conditions.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:52)  
 
So, we will discuss  more  about  the optimum  conditions  or optimum  parameters,  which  it 
requires  to maintain  in a how to say in a proper  shrimp  hatcheries  or proper  prawn  hatchery  or 
proper  carp hatchery  that will be discussed  more  in details  in the coming  lecture.   
So the one of the takeaway  message  that I can give you in this lecture  material  is the 
construction  of a well design ed shrimp  hatchery  is very much  needed  for the production  of seed 
on a large  scale  manner  to meet  the farmers  demand  for commercial  scale  farming  of major  
species  of marine  shrimp s.  
Because  in general,  the collec tion of seed from  the wild stock is not a feasible  idea and 
nowadays,  it causes  a huge  harm , it not only causes  the huge  harm  to the ecosystem,  but also 
it becomes  impossible  to collect  because  nowadays  the wild population  of this kind of marine  
shrimps  are also dropping  like anything.   
So when  we design  a proper  hatchery  it can helps  us, help us not only helping  the complete  
revival  of the natural  wild population  of the shrimps.  But, also it helps  the equal  or, to balance  
the ecological , eco ecosystem  of the nearby  vicinity.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:12) 
 
 
So, these  are the references  from  which  I have  taken  the informations  from  and it is not only 
the only information  sectors,  we can Google  it and you can get to know  a lot of other  
informations  about  the design  of a proper  shrimp  farming  and all. You can take the pictures  in 
a in like, simply  you can search  it and you can see the pictures  and the images,  you can have  a 
better  idea how it looks  like and how when  you will be designing  it will give you a better  idea 
that what  are the parameters  that you need  to follow  and how to design  it accordingly.   
And I would  really  ask you to do proper  brainstorming  about  the way of collecting  the sea 
water,  how we can collect  the seawater  better  from  the coastal  region  and not only that, how 
we can find out the alternate  procedures  for using  the, mimicking  the sea-water.  Suppose  sea 
water  source  is not available  in your sources.   
So, I will just want  you to brainstorm  about  it and think  about  it and Google  it and try to learn  
about  it more  in details.  It will definitely  give you more  insight  information  about  this hatcher  
design . So, thank  you so much. So in the next lecture,  we will discuss  about  the optimal  
conditions  for Hatcher  design  in more  detail.  Thank  you.  