Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 35  
Chemical Treatment  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:31)  
 
Hello everyone, w elcome to the last lecture of the module 7, Water Quality Management for 
the subject Advanced Agriculture Technology. My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick. 
I am from the Agriculture and Food Engineering department of IIT Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time:  00:39)  
 
In this lecture material I will be covering the concepts like water quality improvement by using 
the chemical fertilizers, removal of clay turbidity, liming of ponds, inorganic fertilizers and 
aquatic weed control measurements measures and all.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:54)  
 
In case of water quality improvement in general, we already discussed about different physical 
means and all. So, now we will be discussing about the chemical means by which we can 
improve the water quality parameters and all. Okay ! So, in terms of improvement of water 
quality parameters, what does that mean? Like why I am saying this improvement of water 
quality, you know, the different parameters, like physical parameters that we discussed, 
chemical parameters and the biologica l parameters that can be improved by using the different 
kind of chemicals like say, we can maintain the optimal pH condition, we can remove the clay 
turbidity, we can optimize the total alkalinity and total hardness of our pond.  
We can increase the produ ctivity of the pond by applying the fertilizer to  we eradicate the 
unwanted weeds. We can use the herbicides sites and algaecides. These are the different means 
by which we can treat the water. We can increase the quality of the water using chemical means.  
Okay! So, that ’s what we are going to discuss in this last lecture material of water quality 
module .  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:09)  
 
The first discussion will be on the clay turbidity  removal . How we can remove the clay turbidity  
of our pond or say like our tank using alum ? You know, alum in general we use alumin ium 
sulphate  which in short we use it we used to name it alum. I think it  is very famously used in 
Indian context, I think even earlier generation, even now  also, if you g o to the rural areas, they 
still after shaving, they use the alum which is used for fast clogging of your blood and all.  
So, this alum and also it is used for purification of the water in our wells in earlier days and not 
even earlier  now also people are using this. So , how it works and what is it like this al um which 
we normally use, it actually has a very much beneficial utilization, like like a lot of benefits 
actually to be precise, to remove the clay turbidity  which is a major problem in pond or any 
tank ecosystems. Okay!  
So, it is really important that this clay turbidity  is removed, otherwise what will happen the 
light which is penetrates to the water which has some issues and it will help in phytoplankton 
growth and at the end it will cause you know in eutrophica tion and all these things. So , we use 
this alumin ium sulphate  which can cause  you know  so there are two situation in this case.  
First of all, if you have clay turbidity, if you are not removing it, that is also detrimental because 
if you are not removing it, what will happen? Light cannot penetrate  and if light will not 
penetrate, the phytoplankton  will not bloom accordingly. And that is the basis of your food 
chain . Right?  The pond ecosystem, that is the basis of the chain. If you d o not have enough 
amount of phytoplankton, it will harm the whole ecosystem. It will harm the zooplan kton 
productivity, it will harm the small fishes that they dwell there and it will harm the whole 
ecosystem in general.  
So, because of that, we need to su pply with some agents by which we can chemical agent by 
which we can reduce  the clay turbidity.  Alum is one of them  like this  is alumin ium sulphate  
which is one of these coagulating agents we call because of its structure because of its  you 
know  ionic beha viour, it can easily attract the suspended clay particles and it will make a bond 
or form of clog  and that clo g will because of this clo g or this clo g formation, it will have higher 
specific gravity and it will sediment it on the bottom by which you can ea sily get rid of this 
clay turbidity and all.  
The lowest concentration of alum  which causes a flock of clay particles to form within an hour 
is considered as a desired treatment rate . Okay!  Based on the place to place and based on your 
desired application designs and all  Okay!  in general, around 25 to 30 milligrams per liter will 
apparently precipitate the cl ay turbidity  of most pond. So , that is the standard like around if we 
do not have anything for any information about the turbidity of your pond and all in general, if 
you see the visible tu rbidity is  there, just go ahead with the 25 to 30 milligrams per liter of 
application rate  and it will be enough for hopefully it will be enough for it will solve your 
purpose.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:50)  
 
Alum also has to be dissolved in water and quickly distributed, preferably by spraying over the 
entire pond surface. Application should be made during calm and dry weather because mixing 
by wind and rain will break up the flo c and prevent it from settling down. It ’s very easy, right? 
You understand . When there is rain, there is wind  what will happen? The al um it takes time to 
make this floc formation. When there is wind, when there is rain, this floc will again 
disseminate  and because of that it will dissociate  and because of that,  the the actual necessity, 
the purpose will not be solved.  
So, that is why you have to choose some summertime, like late summer time or like wintertime 
and all so late summer time  also, it is difficult in certain places because this North -western and 
this kind of activities can happen. This kind of strong movement can be taken place. So , it is 
better to choose somewhere  you know in a  in later autumn  or winter, so that would be better 
so that the mixing can be taken place and the mixing will not happen.  
The pond will be as calm as possible and you can use this alum to reduce this clay particle, this 
clay t urbidity  phenomenon. But it comes with some f actors. Some problems, like it’s not as 
detrimental as  you know  the clay turbidity does. So , alum actually has some acidic reaction in 
water. So , it destroys the total al kalinity  and reduces the pH. So , you have to deal with that. In 
that case, what you ca n do in order to neutralize this, you have to neutralize this ionic acid. 
You can provide it with some additional neutralizing agent or some alkaline material which is 
a calcium or magnesium salt  also, you can supply as a buffer solution . So, it will someh ow 
manage this issue.  
Each milligram of each milligram per liter of alum can decrease the total al kalinity value up to 
5 milligrams per liter. Just take into that consideration  it’s a  really huge. I  am talking about 20 
milligram per litre,  30 milligram p er litre of application. So , it will reduce your alk alinity by 
100 to 150 m illigram  per litre which is very drastical.  Okay!  So, if you are not supplying with 
some buffer solutions or enough alkalin ity is not prevailing there, it can also cause some 
irritation to your aquatic species. So , that has to be taken care of. Okay!  
Although alum treatment will clear the pond water by this pond clay turbidity removal like in 
general, it does nothing to correct the cause of turbidity.  Okay!  So, that you have to remember, 
it will not reduce the cause of turbidity. If there is turbidity , it can reduce the turbidity level but 
you have to act on its c ause like when it  is source. What is the reason of this activity? What is 
the reason of this turbidi ty? Maybe you're doing over a eration  that is possible. You just go and 
check like the standard oxygen transfer rate and all these things, if it is well within the limit, 
the expected range and if it is meeting in the field situation or not. So , that you ha ve to calculate 
based on the amount of species that you have and you have to do some calculations.  
Otherwise maybe if it is over a eration  is taking place, what will happen? It will keep on 
increasing the turbidity level. It could by eroding the bottom, th e sediment of your pond.  Okay!  
that is only one example that I can think of right now.  So, I am giving it to you. There are thousands of other reasons by which you can see that turbidity can be increased. So, you have 
to act on that first. We cannot just keep on adding chemicals there and reducing the clay activity 
and all. Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:18)  
 
Liming is another important factor. Ponds with a total al kalinity  value less than 10 milligrams 
per litre, its seldom produce the adequate plan kton for good fish production unless they are 
limed. Okay!  The addition of a lim ing material increases the pH of bottom mar ks and makes 
phosphorus more available. This is the t hat is the necessary of lime.  Okay!  You have to provide 
with the different li ming mate rials. In general , when we talk about lime in general, maybe you 
know about the agricultural limestone and all that is a very standard li ming material which we 
normally provide and it will help in enhancing the alkalinity and all.  
How it will enhance the alkalinity ? You know Limestone when it acts with, we say like carbon 
dioxide  which is in different form, it makes some carbonate or bicarbonate form . It like  
converts into some bicarbonate or carbonate form and which is like stable in nature  and because 
of that because once it is  carbon dioxide is prevailing there in your surface and in your system 
and all  just to give you it  is one of the example, one of the example of how this alkalin ity can 
be enhanced, enhanced alkalin ity can be witnessed when you prov ide the li ming.  
This calcium oxide to calcium carbonate formations will give the increment in the alkalinity in 
your pond and all. Okay! Liming not only increases the pH and also it increases the total 
hardness of pond water.  Right? Because it  is a salt, calcium and magnesium salt will be 
increased. So , definitely the hardness will also increase.  Right?  Liming also increases the 
availability of carbon for photosynthesis by raising the total alka linity of the water. And also , 
liming this agricultural limest one is the best li ming material to use in ponds  because material 
should be finely but it should be finely ground  and to have the best high neutralizing value, 
small particle size is necessary to react quickly with water and mud.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:24)  
 
The neutralizing value of li ming mat erials  refers to the amount of acids that they will neutralize, 
expressed as a percentage of the amount of acid neutralized by an equal amount of pure calcium 
carbonate.  Okay!  Thus  pure calcium carbonate with a neutralizing value of 100  percent is used 
as a standard in referring the li ming rate . For example, how to calculate this? Suppose you are 
using a li ming material having a neutralizing value of 80  percent  to apply at a rate eq ual to 
2000 kg per hectare of calcium carbonate. That means what will be the required amount of 
liming material? It will be 2000 kg per hectare divided by divided by 0.8. So, it will be 2500 
kg per hectare of the li ming material is required in order to mee t this meet your neutralizing 
value , desired neutralizing value.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:15)  
 
What are the other type of li ming materials? There are hydrated limes like calcium hydroxide, 
burned limes like calcium oxide  which also have a higher neutralizing value than the 
agricultural limestone. But if applied in large quantities, however, these materials can cause 
excessively high pH and fish mortality. So , that has to be well taken care of.  Okay!  Hydrated 
lime and burn t lime are sometimes applied to water which contain no fish and to muds of the 
plant which have been drained to raise the pH and kill the fish disease microorganisms. So , it 
has some positive, some additional benefits as well when you use it for different purpose .  
Basic slag is also used which has a very low neutralizing value than the most agriculture 
limestone  but extremely large applications are required because of that . Agriculture gypsum 
though it is not a li ming material, it  is a calcium sulphate . Okay!  It is not a li ming material but 
it has been incorrectly used by the fish culture , this aquaculture is channel because of its 
affectability. Okay! it is effective as well, but it is not actually the li ming material.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:16)  
 
Wha t is the effect of li ming on pH? We already discussed it increases both the alkalinity  and 
hardness almost in equal measure. The increase in the pH and high pH, but very high  pH is 
definitely not recommended. Application of ammonium fertilizers have been r ecommended to 
lower the pH of pond water  in some cases, like if we use lime at a very high rate, this 
ammonium ion in fertilizer is nitrified to nitrate with the release of hydrogen ion which lowers 
the pH and this filter a lum like the  alum the  ammonium sulphate , alumin ium sulphate  may be 
needed to  pond to  decrease the pH. So , these two are like you have to use it optimally li ming 
material  or this different alum, this alumin ium sulphate s and all.   You have to make a proper 
balance between these two to ma intain the pH of your pond or your farm .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:13)  
 
Agricultural g ypsum  or the calcium sulphate  may be applied to water to increase the total 
hardness without affecting the total alkalinity. The treatment rate of for g ypsum in milligram 
per liter may be estimated as calcium sulphate . That  is like g ypsum equal to 2 into total 
alkalinity minus total hardness. This value, the agriculture g ypsum should be applied in the 
same manner as li ming material  and the treatment has a residual effect that varies with the 
flushing rate of the pond. So , that has to be well taken care of.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:48)  
 
Inorganic fertilizers if we talk about it,  it holds  first we need to remember, we need to realize 
what is the best fertilization region that  we can follow to increase the fish yield . Okay!  The 
most popular one is like even in Indian context  also we do in mid -February or early March, we 
apply the  45 kg per hectare of 20 -20-5 fertilizers. Now, you may be confused with what is 20 -
20-25 fertilize rs? You know, when we talk about fertilizer, it  is always NPK, nitrogen, 
phosphorus and potassium. These three are the very important element.  
When we talk about this fertilizer, when you talk about any kind of fertilizer. So , this 20 -20-5 
fertilizers wit h a rate of 45 kg per hectare is required to be applied in early March or late or 
mid-February time. Follow it with two additional application at two weeks of interval, then 
more another three applications of 45 kg per hectare of 20 -20-5 at three week inte rval. Okay!  
Then continuous application of 45  kilograms per hectare of 20 -20-5 at monthly  interval  and 
whenever the water clears so that the Secchi disk visibility ex ceeds  45 to 60 centimeter.  
You know what is Secchi disk  visibility? You remember when we discussed about tur bidity ? 
We discussed how we can finalize, how we can discuss the planktonic turb idity. Turb idity 
caused by the planktons, we can identify by the Secchi disks  and measurement.  Okay!  so it is 
a circular d isk by which we can calculate  we can find out the visibility, it has to be at least 45 
to 60 cm from the surface of the water body  so to make sure that the application is required or 
not, Okay!  
Discontinue the application by the last week of October. Let i t be like this for at least two to 
three months and no need to apply at least for two months  no need to apply any fertilizer during 
that time. This particular fertilization program is widely used and will produce moderate to 
dense plan kton blooms in most o f the ponds. Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:57)  
 
So in general, the ponds are well managed. If it is like well managed ones, often need no 
fertilization  in general . Large application of fertilizer at long interval are wasteful because most 
of the phosphorus is absorbed by the mud, absorbed by the mud particle in the bentic region  
and also nitrogen is lost through the den itrification using the density of the new organisms 
present in the pond .  
Fertilizers may be broadcasted over a shallow water area. Broadcast ed messenger is just simply 
spread it  but application is more efficient if the fertilizers are placed in the underwater platform s 
and all Okay! . platforms should be about 30 cm underwater and one platform is adequate for 
two to four hectare of pond area.  Okay!  The fertilizers are simply poured into these platforms 
and water currents, they will do all the other jobs  like they will simply distribute the nutrients 
as they dissolve.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:54)  
 
Another important thing for chemical fertilizer application is the aquatic weed control.  Aquatic 
weed is it is like simply like w eed is what? Weed means anything that is unwanted, anything 
that it may have some value  definitely it may have some value, but it does  not fulfil the 
requirement of your purpo se. Okay!  suppose in your case, you are culturing some specific type 
of crop, say like maize or say like wheat or anything,  Okay!  But instead of that, you  are getting 
some crop which  must  may have higher value in terms of revenue or in terms of economic 
value. But it does not solve the purpose of  you know  your crop because you need to have 
culture that particular crop.  Right? So, this aquatic weed control is very important. They are 
the base of the food wave and it acts as they function with other ecosyst em components to 
maintain the adequate water quality  also sometimes .  
So, some species interfere with the pond management and endangered the farmed animal and 
impaired the product quality. That ’s why we go for these different weed control measures  like 
we use the fertilizer sometimes to grow the phytoplankton so that the weed cannot grow manual 
or mechanical weed removal. We use non -toxic dyes to inhibit the submerged plant growth. 
We sometimes deepening the pond edges and use the grass cups for the weed co ntrol 
procedures.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:23)  
 
Other way of doing it is the herbicides. It  is actually the quickest way to eradicate the 
established w eed community. However, it is dangerous because sometimes if you treat it for 
long, it can drastically deteriorate the water quality and very toxic for aquatic animals as well. 
Decay of herbicide kill plant may also cause the DO depletion and increased level of dissolved 
carbon dioxide and ammonia. That is why supplemented aeration  has to be available when you 
will be applying the herbicides in your pond. So , that is very important to take care like you 
know when you will be applying this kind of h erbicides  in your pond. Addition is already 
provided so at least the depletion of DO can be maintained.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:59)  
 
Other things definitely nowadays experts won’t  prescribe you to go for any kind of herbicides 
or pesticides or any kind of algicides a lso because any chemical utilisation at that moment of 
time, it will solve your purpose.  Okay!  But in case of emergency, you can definitely go ahead 
with this .  
Algicides  for the same reason where alg icides, it will help you to manage the phytoplankton 
blooms in two distinct for two distinct purpose. First of all, to eliminate the undesirable 
phytoplankton species from the community. Second thing, to reduce the overall phytoplankton 
biom ass s ometimes . Sometimes what happens when there is a favo urable conditi on so they 
actually try to bloom very fast. So , that has to be managed well  and that is the reason why we 
go for these different kinds of alg icides  and all. Okay!  
Mainly we use different kind of copper containing products, copper sulphate s and all this, th is 
is a very famous one. However, this copper sulphate s pentahydrate that we normally use, it act 
as a very good alg icides b ut it has a very drastic al effect on the ecosystem. So , that is also I  am 
telling you know a gain and again that you only go for these applications when it is utmost 
important,  Okay!  because this can disrupt the whole ecosystem and it can be toxic.  It has a 
very high bio accumulation  capacity and which is not expected . Okay!  
Copper sulphate  can be applied in several methods. You can  simply broadcast the crystals over 
pond surface, you can dissolve the chemical in water and spray over the pond or you can simply 
suspend the sulphate  in polar backs where a eraotor  current can disperse the chemical as it 
dissolves.  (Refer Slide Time: 21 :54) 
 
So, in conclusion, whatever we discussed, whatever the chemical methods that we discussed 
for water quality improvement, I would really suggest you to minimize these uses of chemical 
fertilizers or chemical methods. Go for physical methods, biologic al methods, chemical 
methods, you only go only when it is really important and in case of emergency only. And 
however, the li ming is important, very important when we talk about it. So , initially li ming and 
alum, you can provide it when the pH is up and do wn based on the pH availability, you can 
provide alum or the  liming  different li mes.  
So, alum can also help you with the maintaining the proper turbidity of clay turbidity level. But 
however, it fertilizes overall, it increases the natural productivity of  your pond. However, it has 
to be optimally provided . The provision has to be maintained that the application of fertilizer 
is just optimum for supply of enough amount of natural productivity of your pond ecosystem. 
Okay!  
In general, the goal of aquatic pl ant management is to encourage the growth of certain 
phytoplankton at the expense of noxious plants or harmful aquatic b looms. And all Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:09)  
 
So what is the takeaway message from this lecture? That chemical treatments are used to 
improve the water quality and productivity and aquatic we ed control. These options are helpful 
to solving the issue only to a certain extent and proper pond management ca n prevent the need 
of chemical application and maintain the optimum conditions for growth.  
However, a very cautious application is very necessary , very much necessary.  Okay!  perfect. 
So, that is all for the day and we end up with this module. We  will com e up next with the 
technology of water treatment, different water treatment in the coming lecture material.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:45)  
 
So, these are the different references that you can follow. Thank you so mu ch. See you in the 
next module.  
