Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 3 2 
Aeration  
(Refer Slide Time:  00:32 ) 
 
Hello, everyone, welcome to the second lecture of Module 7  of the subject Adverse 
Aquaculture Technology . My name is Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick . I am  from the 
Department of Agriculture and Food engineering department of IIT Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:39)  
 
So, in this particular lecture material, the concepts that I will  be covering on the dissolved 
oxygen and the aeration al requirement and different principles of aeration, the purpose of 
aeration in aquaculture systems , selection and sizing are different ty pe of aeration systems, and 
their affects,  and what are the types of aerators . 
I will be continuing this lecture with the follow up lecture materials as well, with the same topic 
to discuss more about the aeration systems and to solve some numericals  which  are very much 
important and when you will  be designing your farm, and especially when we  will be discussing 
about the requirement of air, requirement of aeration in particular, and what are the type of 
aerators  that you need and what type of aeration syst ems that you need to provide it with what 
capacity . Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:23)  
 
So, in general, you know that the dissolved oxygen is one of the most important variable in 
terms of aquaculture because this is the one of the main living index , you kno w for all the living 
organisms living aquatic organisms present in your plant or in your farm or in natural water 
bodies  and all So, this dissolved oxygen it cannot be replenished naturally  in a upto  after a 
certain limit.  
So, by means of that I I mean to  say suppose in general when natural diffusion  occurs oxygen 
from the atmosphere, it can be easily diffused to the water bodies, but it has one threshold limit, 
when we go for semi intensive or intensive aquaculture systems, we need  we need  huge amount 
of oxygen that needs to be supplied in higher rate also and that cannot be done naturally. 
Because of that reason, we sometimes provided with some mechanical aerators . 
So, these mechanical aerators  what they do, they simply supply the additional amount of , the 
surplus amount of oxygen in the dissolved oxygen form that it requires for the aquatic species 
to survive . So, in general, this mechanical aerator , it increases the rate of oxygen transfer from 
the air by providing the greater specific su rface area between the air and the water by splashing 
the water into the air or by releasing the bubbles into the air . 
What happens when it is like the other way around either you splash the water into the air , so, 
because of that, what happened , the water  bubble , the size of the water bubble will go down 
and because of that, it will get enough surface area , at least it will compared to the normal water 
body , whatever the surface area it has, if you splash it , it will be in the air. So, the surface area 
will be much bigger higher . Because of that it will get more air to water interface . 
And when they say air to water interface will be maximized will be somehow we can enhance 
the oxygen diffusion rate also we enhance . So, by using this phenomena, we normally use it in 
the surface aerators.  There are some type of submersible aerators  where we what we do we 
some provide the aeration from the bottom of the water body and water surface . We supplied 
with the air simply air in a bubble form.  
So, what will happen the air which is in a bubble form when it will go out of the water surface 
and reach to the atmosphere during this duration like whatever the duration that it will cover 
and the space that it will cover in that region what happened the  oxygen that it has this air 
because you know like almost 20.9 percent  of the air is actually there in oxygen . So, this oxygen 
will easily get transferred to the water body . 
So, by this means, we can increase the dissolved oxygen concentration. So, this is  another way 
of transferring oxygen to the or I would say like increasing or enhancing the water oxygen 
transfer rate in water bodies. And the discussion in the beginning only I say it like intensive 
aquaculture is one of the major reason because intensive  aquaculture comes with a very high 
feeding rate and also very high amount of stocking density and it cause a higher amount of 
dissolved oxygen depletion or DO depletion in short we call. 
And which is very much lethal to your aquatic species any kind of aq uatic species which you 
are rea ring in your system or in your  farm. So, that ’s why we supply it with the mechanical 
aeration and it not only increase the concentration of dissolved oxygen , but also it improves  
the efficiency of the feed use and also it imp roves the fish and shrimp  production in general . (Refer Slide Time: 05:06)  
 
Atmospheric oxygen enters into the water by two means  Okay!  in general , first by diffusion, 
which is natural that I already discussed . And natural diffusion that I am talking about in this 
case, so which is a slow process . And the most effective one is like when we provide it with a 
turbulence and or  the any physical agitation  in the water surface or the or we supplied with the 
air bubble in the water.  
So, this is the most effective way of supplying oxygen to the water . This transfer rate from the 
atmospheric oxygen into the pond, it depends on the amount of turbulence that we can create 
and also the ratio of surface area of the pond to its volume . This surface area you  can enhanced 
by doing this turbulence by doing this surface agitation and all and also providing with the 
aeration al amount of bubble . That should be our mot to. 
Somehow , we need to increase the surface area , this ratio of surface area to volume for a pond . 
So, that maximum amount of air -water interface can be utilized for dissolved oxygen 
enrichment . Okay!  And second thing it also depends on the how far the measured  DO 
concentration deviates from the concentration of the saturation. What do I mean by the 
concentration of saturation ? 
In say I am giving you one very general example I think it is better for you to remember this 
fact also that suppose at 20 degrees Celsius temperature at standard atmospheric pressure any 
water body if it does have around 9.07 t o 9.09 milligram per liter of dissolved oxygen present 
in it. So, we can call it a saturate d, it is already saturated with dissolved oxygen , saturated with 
oxygen the water body . 
So, this value can drastically go up and down depending upon the temperature as you know, if 
temperature increase the oxygen diffusibility will decrease . Any air diffusibility will decrease 
because it depends upon the temperature , it’s like the same , if you remember, I already gave 
this example of boiling water , when we boil the wa ter the air bubble is coming out that means 
it is getting like kind of desaturated with the air any air content . And all  
So, by this means we can reduce the dissolved oxygen concentration  when the temperature is 
increasing and thus the vice versa the same the other way around, when we decrease the 
temperature the diffusibility will increase. So, it not only that it also depends on the altitude , it 
depends upon the  pressure  atmospheric pressure.  
So, all these phenomena taken into , if you like considering all these phenomena , and this 
standard number I am giving you , at standard temperature and pressure say like at 20 degrees 
Celsius at standard atmospheric pressure 9.07 milligram per liter or 9.07 PPM parts per million 
is the standard  value of the saturated oxygen concentration in water . Okay!  So, this value and 
say like in a pond in a certain situation the pond has say like 3 PPM of dissolved oxygen and 
another po nd has 6 PPM of dissolved oxygen.  
So, which case do you think this oxyge n diffusibility will be much higher ? Definitely in the 
case when the deviation is much higher . What do I mean by the deviation ? Deviation between 
the saturation concentration and the actual measured concentration , DO concentration. So, in 
the first case, if you remember the example that I have given from 9.07 milligram per liter to 
3.3 milligram per liter, this  this value is much higher , this dissolved oxygen  deficit . 
This value is much higher than 9.07 minus 6, becaus e of that, in the first case, the diffusibility 
will be much higher and oxygen oxygen dissolved oxygen diffusion  rate will be much higher 
from the atmosphere. So, this is the these are the all the depending criteria that the criteria on 
which the dissolved  oxygen concentration, this transfer rate is actually depends on.  (Refer Slide Time: 09:12)  
 
So, further to discuss about the principles of aeration  which is very important for you to know . 
In general, the  you know atmosphere has like vast amount of oxyg en right. So, in general the 
maximum in the atmospheric air the nitrogen is at maximum then the oxygen almost 20.9 
percent  in standard condition  right? Which diffuses  diffuses  into the pond  bottom  by any pond 
water or any surface water bodies in the under normal saturation condition of a normal diffusion 
rate condition . Okay!  
But when the water is super saturated with oxygen, this water can lose oxygen as well,  Okay!  
it is like other way around. Wh en water has suppose oxygen con centration  at 20 degrees Celsius 
more than 9.07 PPM say like 11 or 12 PPM that means, at that particular time and um that 
particular time and temperature that water is super saturated with oxygen . Okay!  So, what will 
happen i n this particular in this case , the oxygen will diffuse back to the air when any medium 
any liquid medium is supersaturated with a particular gas it will d ifffuse  back to its natural 
prevailing zone . 
So, normally it will go to the air , again it will diffus e back to the air . Okay!  And when this 
equilibrium is reached the net transfer of oxygen completely ceases . Okay! So, how we can 
calculate ? When I will ask you about the oxygen deficit , when we are discussing about the 
oxygen deficit it means the dissolved oxygen in equilibrium condition minus the dissolved 
oxygen in measured  concentration like whatever the measured concentration of the DO in water 
at that particular moment of time . 
Oxygen surplus it happens when supersaturation events happen , Okay!  supersaturation type of 
event happened . In that case this DO surplus this oxygen  surplus you can easily calculate by 
subtracting the DO equilibrium from the DO measured DO concentration .right  And this rate of 
diffusion actually as we already discussed it w ill depend upon the degree of turbulence , amount 
of water surface exposed to air and the oxygen deficit in the water body . Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:21)  
 
So, why we you can understand , why we need to go for this aeration,  why do we need aeration 
in gene ral or we need to provide the system our f arm with  the different types of aerators  in 
general . First of all , to increase the air to water interface . Second thing , to increase the 
turbulence thus causing the proper mixing . Okay!  Because sometimes what happened suppose 
you are only providing a very minor turbulence in a certain very limited space of your tank or 
very limited space of your surface water body.  
So, what will happen , oxygen will definitely , the oxygen depletion rate will increase , Okay!  
the oxygen transfer rate from atmospheric oxygen to dissolved oxygen will increase, but it will 
be limited to that particular zone . How we can increase it further ? If you can create a proper 
turbulence all around the water body then only you can you can homoge neously distribute the 
oxygen deficit and you  are provided with the dissolved oxygen coming out from the 
atmosphere which is like which we  are transferring from the atmosphere all around your pond 
or all around your tank or the water body that you are targ eting.  
So, this turbulence is very important . You need to create this turbulence properly. And third 
most important thing is to get rid of some some unwanted or like some gases like specifically 
if I talk about carbon dioxide, H2S, these are the gases whic h are not expected to be there in 
your po nd because that can be harmful in the long run and that can be even lethal you know if 
it is present in water body for a long period of time for your aquatic species.  
So, what are the ways by which we can create thi s turbulence or agitate the surface water ? First 
thing what we can do we can splash the water into air. So, this system when we this kind of 
system when we utilize we call this type of aerators  paddle wheels, we have like you know 
specific fins the paddle wheels, they will keep on rotating they have like say like 10 or 12 , 16 
paddles with it like so, it will the fin it with it . So, that fin will splash into the water and it will 
create a very small bubbles into the air , Okay!  it will spray small  bubbles into the air. 
Second thing water can directly be sprayed into the air with the pump you can simply use a 
proper pump and you can simply throw the water in a atmosphere in a at a certain altitude . And 
from that altitude because of  through  the gravit ational  action it will fall into the surface of the 
water body only and it will create two things first the water is sprayed into the air that is one 
thing and second thing it will splash when it will get back to the surface of any water body . So, 
these two means are actually working here.  
Third thing we can release the bubbles beneath the water surface , you can simply supplied with 
air bubbles far beneath the water body and like it depends upon the size and the capacity of 
your compressor air co mpressor that you  are using or the pump that you  are using. Water may 
be allowed to fall from a very high altitude . So, what will happen , from a higher elevation to 
lower elevation when it will fall it will increase the air to water interface.  
This phenome non is happening naturally in most of the water body , surface water bodies.  You 
know  One famous  example is any waterfalls, any waterfalls how they replenish the dissolved 
oxygen concentration. They replenish by means of having this small waterfalls  in a different 
area, we call it hydraulic jump event or some subcritical to super critical event and vice versa . 
When these kind of events are happening, so, water will get , the surface water body will get 
huge amount of dissolved oxygen , it can easily re plenish this DO deficit in its body.  
So, this is the way of doing, this is the natural way of improvising th e you know  dissolved 
oxygen concentration  in natural water bodies. So, we can also mimic these  kinds of systems . 
You may have heard about the type o f aerator,  cascade aerator , in a cascade air what we do we 
simply pump the water and have higher elevation then we have a circular stair like structure , 
so one after another . So, what will happen it will fall from the center and it will from other all the other sites, you 
know like a small waterfalls . And it will create a nappy flow this particular flow that we call 
nappy flow because of that is the first , because of this nappy flow and this water splashing that 
happens at each stage or each stair it will i ncrease the dissolved oxygen concentration like 
anything. So, that is a very standard way and that is a very age-old practice in this any for 
increasing the dissolved oxygen concentration in the water . Okay  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:17)  
 
So, now we know what is the purpose of doing the aeration.  Now, we know what are the 
fundamentals that we can utilize in this to increasing the dissolved oxygen concentration. So, 
now, if I ask you like Okay, so you have a farm, you are going to design a a quaculture farm or 
say like in any farm , so in farm where the water bodies involved . Whenever any f arm where 
water body is involved and you  are culturing any aquatic species there you have to supply it 
with oxygen.  Okay  
Unless or until you  are working on some anoxic microorganisms . And all There are some 
anoxic microorganisms and anaerob es are  there . So, which are normally microbes like different 
kinds of bacteria . So, they when you  are culturing , just to give you an example, like suppose 
you are working on denitrifies,  different kinds of denitrifies . And all  So, these denitrifies , they 
do not need oxygen for their survival . 
So, in this particular case only you do not supply them with any kind of oxygen. So, in that 
case, it is better to maintai n the dissolved  oxygen level below th an 1 or almost 0, it will be 
better to have as low as possibl e. Okay Other than that particular case, any other cases whenever 
you will be culturing any aquatic species.  Especially any living organisms, which do the aerobic 
respiration process, you need to provide it with the oxygen . 
So, what are the factors that it depends on? First of all, the size of your farm, like or the water 
body, the ir depth,  shape, the power source availability that you can somehow manage to have 
it in your farm . What are the type of aeration  that you  are supplying it? Is it a continuous 
system? Is it only for the emergency basis ? What is the efficiency that you  are expecting, I 
mean, like aerator  efficiency ? 
We will discuss more about it how to calculate this aerator  efficiency in later slides or even in 
later lectures as well. What are the seasonal changes that you can expect like ice covers . And 
all When there is ice covers depending on that you need to maybe redes ign or maybe think 
about the retrofitting of your system . Fish harvest methodology that we  will be using, suppose 
you using, suppose your fish harvest methodology that you  are using, it is like a normal size 
net and all these things . 
So, if you  are using t his kind of net, size nets and all , and all of a sudden in the middle of it, 
you have this paddle wheel aerator definitely you cannot go ahead with this technology , right  
with this method. So, while you need to harvest your aquatic species, you what you need to do, 
you need to simply move o r it is a humongous process.  
So, you do not need to go for this based on your type of harvesting or based on your harvesting 
procedure that you will be your targeting, you will have to choose your aeration  systems, okay 
that is very important that people most of the times they forget they just go ahead with the 
design and all at the end they realized okay, so now how to harvest the fish, how t o harvest our 
aquatic species . okay  
So, you have to ensure that you are ready with the backup plan and you  are ready with the 
proper planning or the method  or choose your methodology for fish harvesting properly even 
before the drawing is done before the d esigning is done.  okay Proper sizing and selection of 
aeration system is critical. What is the reason behind  it ? 
Because you have to ensure that adequate DO level is present in your water body , it will meet 
the mobility and durability needs for the aquacu lturists you know you have to have proper dikes 
and all in the middle of it so that the dike also has to have a proper wi dth so that even  the 
aquaculture  the aquaculturists or like the farmers can easily go from one place  to another. Keep 
the energy consum ptions at as minimum as possible , operating costs . okay  (Refer Slide Time: 20:26)  
 
So, that is  why people come up with some different fundamentals and all of what will be the 
design  and what can be the type of aerator  that can be used. Size selection, definitely oversized 
aeration systems does n’t make any sense. Why to go for oversized aeration?  First of all, it will 
create a lot of nuisance if you realize . 
Suppose you need a certain amount of oxygen certain amount of aeration that needs to be 
provided in your pond of say, like one hectare  area one hectar area , but you  are providing like 
10 times more aeration  you are providing with a 10 times more aeration, it will create enough 
turbulence to completely erode the pond bottom and it will increase that tu rbidity in your 
system in your pond . 
When it will increase the turbidity what will happen it will cause a lot of  affects lot of  unwanted 
results in your aquatic species like suppose  just to give you an example, it can cause the gill 
irritation for your small species  and all . So, that is not acceptable . Second thing is it will induce 
the suspension of waste products , organic detritus which is there in the benthic region and it is 
definitely not acceptable as well.  
Unnecessarily it will over saturate the water which is nothing but a waste of energy. Because 
if you  are oversaturate the water definitely that oversaturated oxygen will go into the , go into  
it will definitely transfer  to th e atmosphere but it does  not make sense . Second thing is like 
multiple unit of aerator it may require  in some cases . 
But it actually depends on the spatial and  temporal variation of DO throughout the pond , but 
you make sure that the amount of aerators  that you actually need is just enough to meet the 
oxygen requirement.  No oversized  aerator  is acceptable and definitely it is like , if it is not 
meeting the oxygen demand then definitely is not good as well . okay  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:17)  
 
So, what are the effects of aeration? So, first of all aeration  it improves the aspect of aquatic 
pond environment in general and also this oxygenated water is distributed. If it is distributed 
more evenly across the pond. It can improve the growth of fish  species . It can reduce the density 
of algal blooms that can lead to the oxygen depletion and the fish health  issues. Also,  this 
aeration can mix the pond water which reduces thermal  stratification . 
Why I say thermal stratification ? You If you remember in last lecture material I think we 
discussed about the different apilimnion  zones,  different li mnion zones and all,  remember ? 
When in the top , when in the daytime what happened the temperature rises like anything, but 
even if you go further  down like even I am giving you just a simple example even a 10 feet , a 
10 feet height of  you know,  I mean  the depth of pond can give you enough the temperature 
difference of around 10 to 15 degrees Celsius . 
Remember we discussed about in last lecture . This change in temperature is not accepted , not 
accepted for the aquatic species which are dwelling all over it . Okay  In general , suppose your 
culturing species like say Indian major carbs  or any normal say silver carbs, carbs and all, 
common cups and all.  
What will happen in that case, they have their specific area of dwelling , some people like to 
stay in the service which we call them surface feeders, then this columnar  feeders and then 
there is bottom feeders lower the who normally like to have leave by fe eding the detritus and 
all in the from the mythic  region. However, suppose you  are culturing any particular species, 
which needs to be which goes up and down,  okay which like it is only a specific type of species 
that we  are talking about when we discuss a bout IMCs and these common carbs.  
In general, most of the species they love to go up to a certain height up to come sometimes in 
bottom sometimes , sometimes in bottom,  sometimes in the surface for them, if there is a 
thermal stratification is happening. So, that’s not accepted . What we need to do ? This aeration  
it will mix the water so because of that, th e thermal stratification event is not taking place.  
So, the temper ature will be evenly distributed throughout the pond throughout your tank and 
because of that, this event can be we can somehow managed to get rid of this even that this 
summer stratification even which can cause physical stress in your aquatic rearing spa ces. It 
will also minimize the organic matter accumulation that may increase the BOD  biological 
biochemical oxygen demand, if you remember we discussed in a couple of lectures later , in a 
couple of lectures, like I think 3, 2 or 3 lectures back and it also  increases the contact area  of 
air to water by agitating  the surface area and  it definitely help in increasing the aeration 
efficiency.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:13)  
 
So, now we know the fundamentals , now we know the methods , now we know the requirements 
of aerator.  And all  Now, let us  discuss about the types of aerator that is already available in the 
market , already available in the research labs. And just to give you an idea about this different 
type of aerators , which will  definitely let you think like what can be the other options that you 
can make available just going through a brainstorming by yourself.  
The major ones are this gravity aerators , surface aerators , diffuser and  the turbine aerators . 
What does this gravity aerators  does? I told you we , this is gravity  aerators  it normally follows 
the fundamentals of like kind of splashing the water from a higher altitude . When it does that 
some higher elevation to lower elevation when the water will keep on coming. What it wi ll do 
it will increase the aeration  efficiency we call them gravity aerators . 
One of the example of this gravity aerator  is the cascade aerators , I told you the example , right ? 
Cascade aerators  they are the one example of this gravity aerators . Different weir and 
splash boards are normally used in case of gravity aerators  for increasing the aeration  efficiency. 
The next type of  it next type of  aerator  is surface aerators  which normally break up and agitate 
the water surface okay like paddle -wheel , spray -type, etcetera . 
Then there comes the diffuser aerators  it normally injects the bubble of air or oxygen in beneath 
the water surface normally common pump or air stone diffuser . I think you might have seen in 
the aquarium , in the aquarium if you see  the small diffuser stone we provide . And we provided 
with this small air pumps . 
This air pumps what it does it will provide the air through these diffusers  and because of , why 
we provide the diffusers , we try to br eak the air in like  you know  this air molecules as small as 
possible. So, what it does is small bubbles, the mor e the  small bubbles the more the  specific 
surface area for in between , more the  interface between the air water increases . And because 
of that, it will help in enhancing th e dissolved oxygen transfer rate between from atmospheric 
air to the water body.  okay  
So, what is the example of these kinds of diffuser aerators?  This common pump and air stone 
diffusers which I you already just now I gave the example of aquarium aquarium  diffusers. The 
fourth type is that turbine aerators . How this turbine aerators  works? I t actually , say it will have 
a pump and motor systems which will be there in the above of the surface and there will be a 
shaft going into the bottom of it or like up t o a certain depth . 
It will collect the air from the atmosphere and it will there is you know a spiral vein  connected  
with it. So, this spiral vein it will just take the air from the atmosphere it will just supply it into 
the bottom or the certain  depth of water by this means, it will provide the aeration provide the 
atmospheric air into the bottom of your water body . 
This is done and this is normally done by means of , this is actually very standard process for 
the very high si ze like how to say like when you have a very big or higher sized pond like  say like  more than 10 hectares or so, so, in that case you need to have this shiftable like portable 
turbine aerators  they are having  it, so along with this wheels and all,  so, they go from one place 
to anothe r and then this aquaculturist  they supply aeration  from its bank. So, that is  how it is 
done in case of turbine aerators . I will show you in details how it looks like.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:59)  
 
If you see, this is the standard example of this gravity aerators , you see there is like inclined 
stairs are provided . The stairs are,  it is actually very simple and very reliable forces of supplying 
like increasing the aeration  rate for any kind of like you know farming practices. So, it is very 
much useful in small semi intensive shrimps’  farms.  
So, this potential energy is simply converted into kinetic energy and that is this is used to in , 
because of that this falling water which has convert into droplets and i t increases the air -water 
interface and by which it will increase the overall . These are the overall oxygen transport.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:39)  
 
These are some of the example of how this gravity aerators . If you see  the first one is perforated 
tray, from the center we put the water we pump the water up and then water will come through 
this perforated trays at a certain interval  and it will independently increase the aeration  
efficiency . 
The same way the model 1 and model 2 both are actually perforate d trays only in the model 2 
also, it see that there is a pump unit which will pump  the water form at a certain height and 
then it will throw into the trays , the trays will happen , trays have this particular perforations, 
zig-zag way it is made so that the water will make a proper splashing into the each tray , it will 
increase the aeration efficiency  and all okay.  
So, the same thing you can see this the fundamentals a little bit different in case of gravity 
driven paddle wheel aerators , the water is pumped out first and then through the flume or 
through the in the over  the storage tank the water is coming into this gravity pedals . The gravity 
pedals will move because of the action of the water only and it will increase the aeration 
efficiency. So, these are the examples of gravity aerators . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:52)  
 
Surface aerators , this I think you have seen in general whoever having the ir aquaculture  
aquacultural  pond or so, or maybe you have seen in your village area. So, this is t he very 
standard paddle -wheel aerator that we normally use to increase the aeration efficiency. There 
are other types of surface aerators  as well if you see in the bottom the left the figure which is 
shown in the left side , this  is called the nozzle type aerator . 
There its normally it has this circular shaped tank and the nozzles are provided at a certain 
angle. So, it will the  the main shaft will keep on moving and it will spray the water from the 
above and it will increase the aeration efficiency in your s ystem. The same way there is another 
type which is called spray aerator  but in case of spray aerator  we use the propeller from certain 
height below the , say certain couple of centimeters or sometimes a couple of inches below the 
surface of the water and we splash it . 
So, it will go up it looks like a fountain so it will increase the aeration  efficiency like anything . 
So, this is also a standard way of doing i t. Not only that, it will also enhance the aesthetic point 
of view also . Why I am saying that ? Because this looks very good , this spray aerators it looks 
very good , it looks it makes a fountain like structure . So, this can solve the purpose like in both 
ways, first of all, aesthetically it will improve that particular area and secondly it will increase 
the aeration efficiency.  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:29)  
 
Another type of aerators is  the diffuser aerator  as I have already mentioned , so one  there are  
the perforated tubing , fixed  diffuser , tubular diffuser. I think this is a diffuser you have seen in 
your aquarium. There are some other type of diffusers as well like U-Tube aerator  or like 
venturi aerator where liquid is normally pumped through a venturi me ter where the air is getting 
in contact  contact  with water and it will increase the aeration efficiency. So, this venturi aerator  
is also a very like I decade old  process which normally being used in specific purpose , for some 
specific purpose.  
(Refer Slid e Time: 33:04)  
 
This is a very standard simple diffuser and which is used in the pond . 
(Refer Slide Time: 33:09)  
 
The turbine aerator  as I told you see this motor and air intake point and it will  go up to a certain 
height up to a certain depth and this air -water mixture is actually through the propeller, you 
will get this air -water mixture which will increase the aeration efficiency . You see in the left 
side the structure  mounted turbine aerators are there for you know as I mentioned as I told you . 
When you have a very larger area of your pond or larger area of your  tank area  tanks  and all . 
So, then these kinds of proctor mountain turbine generators are used. So, you can go from one 
place to anothe r and you just use it for increasing the aeration efficiency in your or increasing 
the dissolved oxygen rate of your pond . 
(Refer Slide Time: 33:44)  
 
So, we  will continue with these aerators  in the coming lecture also. So, to give you more idea 
more knowledge about aerators  how it works, what is the fundamentals of aeration , aeration  
rates and all , we will discuss about some numericals, we will discuss about the equations by 
which it actually it governs. And so, in general in this particular lecture, we have discussed 
about the essentiality of active and proper pond  management based on aerators  and all . 
So, which will definitely provide us with the maintaining maximum production level  and also 
ensure the quality products . And it will this managing this DO level in this sense is the major 
concern  for us and the mechanical aeration  is the most viable practice to employ the dissolved  
oxygen concentr ation in water bodies . 
(Refer Slide Time: 34:38)  
 
And aerators  are the one by which we normally do that and this aeration can help not only  not 
only by providing the enhance productivity, but also by other means, it will give you increase 
in the carrying capacity of the pond,  it will make intensive agriculture practices possible and 
also it will help us  you know  when we provide it with the high rate of feeding that is also 
possible in this particular  case.  
(Refer Slide Time: 35:10)  
 
So, I will keep on discussing about this aquaculture practices more in details in the coming 
lecture. So, these are the references from which I have taken some information for this lecture 
material . So,  will definitely continue with aerator in the aerator  discussion  on this aerator  
systems in  the coming lecture . Till then, t hank you.  
