Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick   
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 31  
Important Water Quality Parameters and Criteria  
(Refer Slide Time:  00:32 ) 
 
Hello everyone . Welcome to the Module 7  of the subject Adverse Aquaculture Technology . 
My name is Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick , I am from the Department of Agricultural and 
Food Engineering of IIT Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:42)  
 
So, in this lecture I  will be disc ussing about the about some  important water quality parameters 
and their criteria and why they are , you have , you have  to know this factor  you have to know 
these parameters , and  how does it matter in terms of the aquaculture technology  and all. Okay!  
(Refe r Slide Time: 00:55)  
 
So, water quality management is very important , in aquaculture, it’s one of the prime factor 
that you manage the water precisely you know because that’s the, it’s like that is all like water 
is the one what  it matters because it’s all the aquatic speci es they are dwelling in the water 
bodies  and all . So, water quality parameters are very important and it can be divided into three 
major categories , its physical parameters, chemical and the biological ones  okay!  I will be 
discussing in details about each parameter soon . Okay!  
So, in general, the water quality it should  the it should  be suitable enough for the survival and 
the growth of the fish that is what we normally target. And there are different water quality 
parameters, but a c ouple of them are very significant in nature and they are very much 
important to have it in a particular range for your aquatic species  to survive . Okay! This 
important water quality  parameters need to be at its optimum level as I discussed at its range 
for a healthy and successful aquaculture farm  and systems . Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:04)  
 
So, what are the different physical variables which are very important to discuss about  are 
water temperature, salinity, turbidity, total gas pressure, chemical variables, dissolved oxygen, 
pH, alkalinity, or total hardness and nitrogenous compounds and carbon dioxide or the 
carbonaceous component . Okay!  And biological variables are the presence  of plankton, it can 
be phytoplankton, zooplankton, and aquatic weeds.  Okay!  
 So, these are the variables.  Those are major and very important. And we need to discuss very 
precisely at each and every components of each and every variables, we need to have a very 
basic idea at least on each of these variables so to have a better, be a good water engineer or be 
a person who can because if you do n’t know the water quality, if you do n’t know the water, 
you cannot understand the behavior of your fish, you cannot understand the behavior of your 
aquatic species . 
You have to know the water quality, you have to know what are the parameters which are very 
important for your aquatic species, for them to naturally dwell there. Let us  discuss about  these 
variables in detail.  Okay!  Before going that, you  will see like a couple of them have  you know  
this with their performance a re varied on . 
If you see this x -axis, the increasing amount of , increasing value of the components and the y -
axis we have the performance it can vary like in case of temperature , pH and salinity, the 
performance is  very low at a certain age, and it goes up  to optimum stage and then it again if it 
increases a certain threshold value, it again drops down the performance.  
In case of ammonia, at the very low nitrate and toxic pollutants the zero it is better the best 
performance thus it is the more the in the v alue is increased with time or increase in your water 
body, it will definitely reduce the performance to zero . The more the ammonia the more the  
nitrite , the more the toxic pollutants the se are  harmful. So, this is this the  graph is showing the 
harmful pollutants  Right? . The zero is better, the higher it is detrimental.  Okay!  
Third graph  is oxygen and the food availability. Zero it is obviously wors t. The moment it 
increase, it means a certain value . After a certain time it doesn’t affect the performance at all. 
If you can increase the oxygen if you can increase the food availability, but it does  not affect 
the performance.  
Not much , not much , I am saying here not much, but sometimes the supersaturated oxygen can 
even be harm ful sometimes super, like more amount of uneaten fish, if you  are supplying a 
huge amount of unwanted like, the feed  and all , this uneaten feed what will happen it will cause 
damage passively, it will start increasing the nitrogenous compounds present in t he water 
because they will deteriorate in the bottom or maybe it is a protein , so it will deteriorate the 
water like anything . Okay!  
And supersaturation is also not good sometimes , supersaturation of oxygen is also not good, 
though the curve is normally gi ven the sigmoid curve, this S -curve , but in general 
supersaturation is also not good that also you need to think of it , Okay! take care of it . So, these 
are the different parameters and you see how their performance is varied.  
Using these three graphs, you  can nicely remember . Okay!  So, some of them have this bell 
curve , some of them has this deteriorating curve , some of them have this sigmoid curve , based 
on the parameters and their performance  and all , their application  and all Okay! . (Refer Slide Time: 05:47)  
 
So, let us  start with some physical parameters, let us  start with temperature. I do  not have to 
say much because  you know  how temperature can affect with this ectothermic species  and all 
right? . If you see the graph, the temperature of a species at the very low it is very detrimental , 
at certain moment time it reaches his optimal growth and then it also goes down . The lesser the 
temperature the mortality rate is very high, see the lower limit, it is a lethal limit.  
And the higher temperature is al so not good, it is the upper lethal  limit. So, mortality is very 
high in case of upper  lethal  limit and lower  lethal  limits . When the optimal growth is reached 
the mortality is less,  mortality rate is very less , definitely .Right?  So, that’s how most of the  
cases th e species work. So, most of the aquatic species work , all the aquatic species works . 
Okay! They have their tendency to dwell at its own temperature , own optimal range of 
temperature . Okay!  
You m ay know about the term cycl ophilic, mesophilic, thermo philic, things are known . Okay!  
This is the differen t, in case of microorganisms also we can define , in case of aquatic species 
also we can define, it is like some people are , some animals who are cyclophilic in nature , some 
are mesophilic in nature , some are thermophilic in nature, cyclo is a lower range of temperature , 
meso is  like medium range of temperature, thermo  is like high temperature . 
And the water temperature should have to be at a certain stage based on the target species . 
Right? So, most of the  water parameter why it is important , it is one of the major water 
parameters is this water temperature because it directly or indirectly affects all the other water 
quality variable , its natural productivity of your aquatic species or natural productivity  of your 
system and also the cultur al species.  How it affects the all the water quality  parameter ? 
If the temperature is change , suppose you have another parameters like pH or acidity , alkalinity 
or say like  hardness or any other say like dissolved oxygen  and all Okay! . Just to give you one 
example , you know when we boil the water what will happen , it started bubbling up . What is 
it all? All the air that is entrapped that is dissolving condition that is getting out of the water 
body .Right  
In general , when we do the we heat the water in a higher temperature , when we boil the water . 
What does that mean ? The more the temperature, the diffused oxygen or diffused air will go 
out. So, dissolved oxygen level will go down. So, if the temperature is higher tha t dissolved 
oxygen will be reduced. So, it will affect your aquatic species , isn’t it? 
So, in the same way just try to imagine , same way  if you  reduce the temperature it will increase 
the overall dissolved oxygen uptake. So, you know these laws,  and all  how this Henry's law 
acts this is and there are like different other parameters also which are important in diffusibility  
of air  and all Okay! . So, anyway , so when this diffusibility is actually read directly related to 
the temperature of your food substance  food. Okay!  
So, in this case the water temperature it increases , DO level will decrease the temperature 
decreases, DO level will increase. So, that’s how, this is just an example , just to give you an 
example, how other parameters are also important are al so related to the temperature . Okay!  
Natural productivity of will definitely be disrupted because the temperature goes increase or 
like because of thermal pollution,  and all  because it will kill all the , if not the you know the 
bigger size or the higher tr opic cultures but it will definitely kill all the phytoplankton , 
zooplankton , and all these things which are  actually the feed for all those higher species . And 
all  So, because of the thermal pollution, that  is the reason of thermal , that is a detrimental part 
of the thermal pollution . 
So, third is the cultural species , culture  species also be  in stres s. Suppose you  are culturing 
Atlantic sun, which has a very low range of temperature that it can survive. Because if your 
temperature o f your farm is like 35 degrees , 40 degree Celsius, definitely it cannot survive . 
Right So, that is  how it, that is how temperature is , that is  why temperature is very important 
and how it actually affects the overall the water quality parameters , natural p roductivity and 
also the culture  species.  There is optimum range of temperature at which the fish growth is best , immune system is 
great and also the fish feeds well. In that sense , the mortality is very low as we already 
discussed, this range  of this rang e  is different for different species  though . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:47)  
 
The fish can be grouped under three categories based on their temperature at which they can 
survive . Cold water species, sometimes we call them you know cyclophilic or  sometimes , in 
general  just remember it as a cold-water  species . Cool water species and warm water species, 
it’s easy to remember . Cold water species less than 15 degrees Celsius, cool water 15 to 20 
sometimes it can go 20 , 23, 25, warm water is more than 20 . 
This range is very important for you to know that which type of species you  are culturing and 
what is  it natural temperature optimum temperature for its  best growth and best survival that 
you need to know and based on that you calculate , based on that only you have to prevail that 
temperature in your farm or wherever you  are farming  there . Okay!  
Thermal stratification , it occurs due to water temperature, you see the water temperature how 
it varies with the depth , suppose this is a pond as  you can see, this red line is showing a pond  
suppose , the air and water interface you can see . In the water interface up to a certain line is 
the temperature is almost same, so it is called like in a  epilimnion.  
From epilimnion , it comes to the thermoclin e, thermocline , you see the line, this thermocline 
line, in the thermocline line, it’s actually the place where in general the temperature is this 
dotted line this if you see  this, how to say,  this thicker line , this thicker dotted line, it is like the 
thermocline region . Okay! So, the temperature is like say similar all through, anyway.  
So, there is like a epilimnion and there is this hypolimnion . In the case of epilimnion or 
hypolimnion  the temperature difference can be almost 10 degrees Celsius can be as high as 10 
to 15 degrees Celsius . You see in case of water temperature , in case of epilimnion it is around 
33 in this particular example, in case of hypolimnion it can go down to almost  20 degrees 
Celsius.  
So, this huge difference in the water level based on depth  can also be witnessed . And based on 
that also your species will survive. So, if you check your water temperature from the surface 
that so, your thermometer you say like over 30  degree Celsius . Let us  go ahead with all the 
warm water fishes , then you see in the bottom the temperature and warm water fishes which 
are normally bottom dwelling one. 
Suppose you r any benthic species , then you got to know that on the bottom the temperat ure is 
almost 15 degrees Celsius.  And all.  So, they will be in  stress,  they cannot survive the 
temperature. So, in that case, either you have to reduce the depth , somehow you have to reduce 
the depth so that of your tank or if you  are doing that you have to increase the surface 
temperature somehow or you have to provide with the heater or somehow you have to increase 
the temperature. So , that is  just to give you an example like how it will look like.  Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:48)  
 
Salinity  is another important parameter which actually measures the concentration of the 
dissolved ions in water, which is normally  we expressed in gram per liter. So, each species 
gram per liter , there is another unit for that also , just for you to remembe r gram per liter or PPT 
parts per thousand,  not trillion , parts per thousand PPT. 
So, in general salinity is expressed in gram per liter or parts per thousand. So, each species has 
its optimum salinity range at which it can survive because outside this ran ge fish have to expend 
a huge amount of energy for its osmoregulation process at the expense of growth and other 
processes . And because of that, it will cause different kinds of health hazard for  your aquatic 
species.  
If the salinity  deviates too much from this optimum it becomes also fatal for the fish as it cannot 
maintain the internal so il balance. Salinity of seawater can vary from 33 PPT to 37 PPT , 
freshwater less than 2 to 3 PPT, brackish water it can be in between, so like 10 -20, 10, 15, 20 
PPT and all . This salinity,  you can easily calculate with this equation 30 plus 1. 805 is chlorine , 
this is the chlorinity . 
S= 30 + 1.805 [ C]   
In general, when we talk about salinity  now in see water almost more than 50 to 60  percent  
because of the chlorine  only. So, chlorinity when we talk about it is not only actually chlorine 
but it actually also count the bromine and iodine also . So, chlorinity  actually is submission of 
chlorine, bromine and iodine . 
But however,  we normally name s it only chlorine , by means of  chlorine because it is the major 
portion of the salt water actually , almost 60 , sometimes 65 percent  even 70 percent  also it can 
go so that is  why we name it chlorinity only. So, chlorinity if you know , if you know the salini ty 
you can easily calculate the chlorinity and the vice versa in both the units or in milligram per 
liter. When it is calculated in milligram per liter anyway.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:00)  
 
So, the third one that we discuss here is like the turbidity, it is a measure of light penetration in 
water. I think you know  the terms the Brownian motions colloidal  particles  and all  these things . 
So, I hope you know these things.  You know the different suspended particles colloidal 
particles  and all . Anyway, so, these are very important for you to know, you can Google it, you 
can search for it, it’s very important things for you to remember , it is for your own knowledge 
purpose only.  
So, anyway, so let us  discuss , let us  not deviate much , let us  discuss about the turbidity.  It is 
caused by the dissolve and the suspended substances such as clay particle , silt,  humic 
substances and planktons . Okay! Turbidity caused by the planktons are usually  desirable as it 
enhances the fish production , limit s the light penetration , preventing the growth of unwanted 
aquatic species.  
So, turbidity after up to a certain level , which is caused by the planktons  are usually  desirable. 
However, the turbidity caused by clay and suspended solids is undesirable. Because if there is 
clay and suspended solids, what will happen , it is just like you know if you have if you go and 
you have in front of sandstone, what will  happen,  it will irritate you, you cannot see anything , 
it will irritate the whole ecosystem between  a lot of things , it is  like same for them.  
For them if there is dwelling area is water where there is a lot of clay, a lot of suspended solids, 
it will inhibit the  planktons growths , it will clog the gills of the small fish, it will settle into the 
fish egg involved their hatchling activities, shield the food organisms, so that cannot be eaten 
by the fish , it settle in the tanks and it will reduce the capacity like volu metric capacity of your 
tank, it will clog the filtration equipment, its nuisance . 
So, the simply acceptable limit for clay and silt load is around 20 gram per liter not more than 
that. If it is more than that, then that is  it, then it is very, then this value is also not fixed , this 
value is also not fixed for each and every case. It can vary depending upon your stock 
depending on your funding design.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:28)  
 
So, in general, it is measured using the Secchi disk . The Secchi d isk is around the round  disk, 
you can see this lady is holding a  disk, this different colored , this  two-colored disk , where it’s  
normally it has a diameter of around 30 centimeter and it actually gives you the visibility as a 
measure of turbidity  for aquaculture purposes.  
In case of suitable plan kton density results in Secchi disk visibility of around 30 to 60 
centimeter . Sometimes we do it , nowadays with all the , instead of  Secchi disk we can just 
collect it and we do it with the turbidity meter as well . This is the increase of turbidity meter 
mainly we focus not the plankton  density, but when what it costs when the turbidity is majorly  
caused by the clay on the  suspended solids . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:17)  
 
Fourth one is the total gas pressure , this is also another physical parameter which is very 
important . So, total gas pressure or like TGP in short,  we normally do when we discuss we use 
this word TGP only , is the sum of the partial pressure of all gases dissolved in the water . Okay! 
The differe nce between the total gas pressure and the barometric pressure. So, in general, what 
is the barometric pressure , it is 760 millimeter of mercury  right , you know it , Right.!  
So, this barometric pressure and the difference between the TGP is the delta P or the delta 
pressure that we normally discuss . If the delta P is more than 0, that is total gas pressure is more 
than the barometric pressure that means the water is super saturated with the dissolved  gases. 
What will happen if it is super saturated ? In prov ided the conditions it will dissolve to the 
atmosphere in general . Okay!  
In case of if the del  P is less than 0 that means the water is under saturated with that gas, in 
particular that gaseous component or say  like all the gases coming along the gases . Okay! So, 
this gas saturation how to calculate , in general we use this equation BP plus del P  divided by 
BP multiplied by 100.  
%𝑇𝐺𝑃  =BP + ∆P
𝐵𝑃∗100 
 So, just give you an example , if the total gas pressure is you are asked to calculate if given the 
barometric pressure is 760 millimeter of mercury and the pressure differences 38 millimeter , 
del P is 38 millimeter of mercury.  
So, how will you calculate the saturation level ? Total gas pressure will be 760 plus 30 divided 
by 760 multiplied by 100 you will get the value of 105 which is the value which shows us the 
saturation level that means  which is oversaturated . Okay! If the value is 100 that means it is 
just saturated , if less than 1 00 it is under saturated , if it is more it is super saturated . Okay! So, 
that’s how the total gas pressure is calculated . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:13)  
 
Another  important parameters the chemical parameters when i f we start discussing about  this 
is like one of them is like dissolved oxygen . Dissolved oxygen , what does that mean? Oxygen 
is there in the air , oxygen  is there in the water also . How oxygen is get into the water ? Because 
of the diffusion phenomena  in general . Okay!  
So, if you keep  on somehow there is action of water action and all, there is a  wind activity, 
because of the wind activities , and all  because of the splashing mechanism , because of there 
are hundreds of phenomenon . You can artificially provide some aerator  which will kee p on 
rotating o ver its surface. So, it will splash the water into the air . 
And what will happen in might very small particles, because of that the diffusion  rate can be 
increase d, right? So, that’s how diffusion  rate is increased . And in the dissolved oxygen 
concentration  can be increased in the water body. Why this is important ? Dissolved oxygen is 
the basic means of supply of oxygen for your aquatic species definitely . 
So, you then need oxygen as well . If the dissolved oxygen level is very low, defini tely it is 
lethal for them, it’s like us, if oxygen concentration instead of like 20.9 it goes to like say even 
18, 19, 17, then that is  it, it is very, very much toxic for us like we  we are  start having short 
breathing  and all , we are  having less amount o f oxygen in your hemoglobin  and all Okay! . So, 
it will cause different multi organ failures and then different types of disease, like unwanted 
situations  and all.  
In general, dissolved oxygen concentration is very important , it has to be at least 5 to say more 
than 5, better to have it like 6 to 7 this range  for any kind of species. Almost any type of aquatic 
species th e dissolved  oxygen concentration should  be around at least more than 5. If it is less 
than 5, even for cold water fishes, 5 is lethal , for warm  water fish es up to 5 it can sustain 
because in general you know warm water, low dissolved oxygen and cold water high dissolved 
oxygen you know it  right ?  
So, in case of cold water, they normally dwell in a high  dissolved oxygen concentration . So, 
for them 6 is minimum , for warm  water they can survive in, they can still survive up to 5 but 
if it is less than 5, they still can survive but the growth will be s low because of for long term 
exposure they will be pretty much in irritated, they will very much be irritated.  
If it is less than 1 that is  completely  lethal and they will definitely cannot survive  and all . For 
short time it is okay but long term definitely they will not survive they will die. So, it has to be 
more than 6 for cold water more than 5 for warm water the better to be around in the range of 
up to 7, 7.5 something like that. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:03)  
 
 
pH, the pH , you know the pH is the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ions concentration  and 
then like you know it, it’s there like you know already in chemistry from your chemistry class 
from I think class 11 or even before that class 7, 8 also we get it nowadays. So, this hydrogen 
ion concentration is a molar concentration in general of hydrogen  ion. If you do the negati ve 
logarithm of it, you will get the pH . 
It varies from , do you know  the range in general , it is normally 1 to 14. In general, we have 
this less than 1 . So, like in general, we have this range of around 1 to around 14, it is in general . 
The maximum it can reach around  14 and depending there are some solutions for which it can , 
in most of the cases, it will be like almost in all the cases it could be lies in between that . Okay!  
Optimal pH range for the healthy fish  is like around 6.5 to 9, that’s the desirable range.  
If it is below than that, that is  also harmful , if it is more than that, that is also harmful. One 
more thing I forgot to tell you when we were discussing about the dissolved oxygen is you have 
to remember the oversaturation is also n ot good . So, if the dissolved oxygen concentration , 
remember this discussion that we  are having this 6,  7.5, 8, it cannot go more than that , actually 
9.07 milligram per liter, all these units are in milligram per liter or PPM parts per million . 
Okay!  9.07 milligram per liter is the saturation dissolved oxygen concentration  in at 20 degrees 
Celsius for any water body.  
Remember this value , 9.07 milligram per liter at 20 degrees Celsius that is the saturation 
concentration for dissolved oxygen , saturation o f dissolves in concentration in water at 20 
degrees Celsius, it will vary with temperature but in general  20 degrees Celsius say like cool  
water species their pH should be maximum is 9.07 , so and minimum is 6. 
So, it has to be in between that , that is often should be in between that . pH we already discussed 
some of the already , I am sorry for going back again. So, in this case if it is like less than 6 or 
so the fish will start having a slow growth and below than 5  the reproduction rate will be  
stopped and below 4  it will be called it is called acid dead point , they cannot survive in the 
water at all , acidic water . 
Same way if it goes over 9 that is also detrimental and after 11 they will die that is called 
alkaline death point. In case of alkal ine conditions,  the presence of OH radical will be 
maximum , in case of acidic condition the H plus radical H the presence of hydrogen ion is 
much more prominent. So, neutral range is the best were around as I discussed 6.5 to 9 is the 
best range for the gr owth of aquatic species . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:02)  
 
Total alkalinity and total hardness , total alkalinity is the acid neutralizing capacity of water and 
it includes all the bases that are titrated with a strong acid to a pH of about 4.5 . Okay!  Total 
hardn ess is the concentration of all the divalent ions  mostly calcium and magnesium . So, that’s 
how we calculate the total hardness in water.  
In general,  as a thumb rule, these values are almost same for in the most productive water 
bodies,  like say in case of fish culture generally it falls between total hardness should be 20 to 
300 milligram per liter  and alkalinity will be also 20 to 400 milligram per liter  for satisfactory 
performance. If you want to know more details, you can Google it, you can sear ch for it and 
you can go ahead with my other lecture materials as well.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:45)  
 
Nitrogen that is also very important  thing.  Why nitrogen is very important ? Because nitrogen , 
okay nitrogen can be of different species , different nitrogen  species  can be there in water, it 
can be organic nitrogen presents inside the body of the cellular organisms, it can be ammonia cal 
nitrogen, ammonia cal nitrogen can be of two types, ionized ammonia , NH4 positive and also  
un-ionized ammonia or pre-ammonia what we call , pre-ammonia gas NH3 -N. Pre-ammonia is 
very notorious for  very notorious for  your aquatic species,  it is like in high pH normally this is 
actually partially reversible equation. So, they are integrated . 
The biggest on the pH, the ammonia nitrogen can be in ionized form  or in unionized  form . If it 
is low pH , it is ionized  from , this high pH is unionized form. High pH unionized form,  it is 
lethal, completely lethal for your microorganisms , for your any aquat ic species  Okay! , because 
it is really h armful and then this nitrate , nitrate is still okay but nitrite is another lethal  nitrogen 
species . 
We need to get rid of the nitr ite nitrogen and unionized  ammonia as soon as possible from your 
system . Just remember  this t wo, unionized ammonia or free ammonia and nitr ite nitrogen NO2  
negative it is very lethal for your aquatic species . In case of organic nitrogen definitely it decays 
to release the nitrogen , release ammonia the y are presence in the biomass . Ammonia nitrogen 
is very toxic for fish and invertebrates, even in a very small quantity predominates at high pH . 
Ammoniacal, This ionic ammonia which is nontoxic  except at high concentration predominates 
at low pH . Nitrite nitrogen is very lethal  I told you , it cannot be more than it should be in the 
range of 0.5 to 5 milligram per liter , still it is very high 5 milligram per liter . I am saying just 
the range based on different species , their acceptability range  and all . Nitrates are the least toxic 
of the inorgani c nitrogen  compounds . 
This is how it looks like , if you see the right -side figure,  organic nitrogen and I see the from 
organic nitrogen you first look into the ammonia cal and ammoniacal  nitrogen and which is like 
either in the both the form . So, this organic nitrogen can , because of the ammonifying  
microorganisms it can be converted ammonia fixating  microorganisms, it can be converted to 
ammonia then this ammonia because of the presence of Nitrosomonas it is a nitrifying bacteria 
it can convert it into  the nitrite and from nitrate because of the presence of Nitrobacter it can 
convert into nitrate . Okay!  
So, this process is called the nitrification process on we use the nitrifying bacteria like 
Nitrosomonas and Nitrobacter.  Then denitrification process c an also happen or the 
mineralization process sometimes this ammonia denitrification process when happened this 
nitrate is converted into the nitrogen gas , Okay!  this is called denitrification process presence 
of denitrifying  microorganisms which are anaero bes in nature . 
They do not need oxygen for that. But in case of nitrifying bacteria, we need oxygen for the 
survival  Okay! . Denitrification process nitrogen gas  is there , they just dissolved the air. So, by 
this process we can get rid of the nitrogen from the wastewater . Another process  is the 
mineralization , this nitrate can be utilized by the plants  and all  then they will convert it to the 
organic nitrogen into the biomass.  
So, there  can be , that is called the mineralization  and all okay!  And also, that c an be used by 
other microorganisms as well for fixating  this organic nitrogen.  So, this is how this cycle goes . 
Okay!(Refer Slide Time: 31:38)  
 
Organic matter , present  in water as l iving plankton,  suspended particles of decaying organic 
matter and the dissolved  organic matter. Two very important variables you need to know BOD 
biological oxygen demand and COD , chemical oxygen demand .  I cannot give you elaborated 
discussion about all these, these two parameters. It is better to go Google it . You can lear n a 
lot of things about it.  
It is very important parameters that everyone should know about BOD and COD whenever you  
are talking about any water related research, what are work.  The oxygen demand of bacteria 
and the microorganisms to metabolize organic mat ter in pond water is called the BOD, 
biological oxygen demand . And chemical oxygen demand is the parameter that measures all 
organic, biodegradable and non-biodegradable  substances.  
The oxygen demand by this all this matter . What does that mean? BOD means,  biological 
oxygen demand means is the oxygen demand by only the biological materials . COD , they take 
care of biological materials, all the chemical materials presence like , all the other biodegradable 
and non-biodegradable  substances as well . For them also to degrade how much oxygen is 
needed. So, they calculate that also . 
When we calculate the chemical oxygen demand , that will give us more precise value of oxygen 
requirement  than the BOD. Okay!  But BOD also actually kind of a passive  way of say ing 
amount of living organisms present in your system or living or nonliving organisms present in 
your system . I mean  like organic matter present  in your system . But chemical oxygen demand 
which will keep the organic plus inorganic oxygen demand as well.  
However, not all inorganic  Okay! . There are some type of refractory compounds, which still 
cannot be, we cannot get their oxygen demand value which are very high end engineering they 
have it . So, we cannot get their oxygen demand by even chemical oxygen dem and process  also. 
So, in order to give you a very basic discuss about the BOD and COD, B OD process is done in 
a biological way . 
So, it is in a 300 ml bottle you will see you will Google it, it is better , I cannot give you more 
details about it in this moment. Because it takes itself a 1-hour lecture, a complete 1 or 2-hour 
lecture to give you , just to give you a brief about the BOD  and COD . And COD  is when we 
use acidic environment and we use diatomic sol utions at 150 degrees Celsius for 2 hour, we 
burn the  solution we burn that in and be at the end we calculate spectrophotometrically the 
amount of COD values . 
So, this is the BOD and COD  and this is you see  BOD, normally 5 days BOD we calculate. So, 
it can  be all the carbonations  BOD if we want to really calculate it can take like couple of days , 
10 to 15 days but in general we only calculate to make it standardized. We calculate 5-day 
BOD.  In 5 days, how much oxygen is actually being utilized by your organ ic by the bacteria 
or the microorganisms present in your water body , metabolize  the organic matter in the system . 
So, that is  what called the BOD  system, BOD 5 . Okay!  
And COD is like ultimate one , COD and BOD  L is the ultimate BOD  and carbonaceous BOD , 
there are nitrogenous BOD . There are a lot of factors , a lot of parameters that involves with 
BOD  and COD. S o, I really request you guys to google it and get to know more details about . 
And you  can go for the NPTEL  lecture material on BOD and COD as well  to get more details 
about it. Okay!  (Refer Slide Time: 35:17)  
 
This is the effect of DO on the plank toning activity. If you see the more  the DO at certain level 
and the du sk, in a single day from dawn, noon , dusk , midnight to dawn like this in 24 -hour 
cycle. How the heavy phytoplankton bloom can be expected when there is a high amount of 
oxygen dissolved  oxygen ? When there is low oxygen there  is light phytoplankton bloom  you 
can expect . Okay!  
(Refer Slide Time: 35:45)  
 
So, in conclusion, water quality is very critical consideration in aquaculture and water quality 
in aquaculture has managed to correct the facility's water supply to enhance the productivity of 
the pond  system , to mitigate the water quality deterioration r esulting from the use of 
manufactured feeds,  to improve the water quality before cultural water is discharged to the 
outside environment.  
(Refer Slide Time: 36:06)  
 
And t he takeaway message we discussed about the aquatic animals they grow best when the ir 
environmental conditions are within a certain range that define the good water quality . And 
water must be managed during the production to ensure good growth and to avoid the stress 
and death  of your farm ed species. And water quality  therefore the first la st and most important 
consideration for successful aqua culture practices.  
And we also discussed about some of the very basic aquaculture water quality parameters that 
we need to know about and to get well added with the discussion that we  will be doing with 
this based on the any aqua  cultural practices . So, I am again emphasizing this point like you 
guys, everyone should know more in details about this water quality parameters, you can 
Google it, if you want to know more in details . 
(Refer Sli de Time: 36:59)  
 
You can go ahead with different research papers , you can go ahead with these references.  And 
some additional details you will get from the  Google  as well and also you can see from my 
other lecture  measures.  So, thank you so much. See you in the next lecture . 
