Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gaurav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture  38 
Bio-electrochemical  system  based  water  treatment  
 
Hello everyone  welcome  to the third  lecture  of module  8 of advanced  aquaculture  
technology ; my name  is Professor  Gaurav  Dhar  Bhowmick,  I am from the department  of 
agriculture  and food engineering  of IIT Kharagpur .  
(Refer  Slide  Time  00:39)  
 
In this lecture  material  I will be covering  you the backg round  of alternate  wastewater  
treatment  strategy  requirement  and we will be discussing  about  the bio-electrochemical  
systems , microbial  fuel cells to be precise  in this lecture , and in the follow  up lecture  we will 
be discussing  about  couple  of more  bio-electro chemical  systems , hybrid  treatment  systems , 
which  will be which  normally  we use to improve  the efficacy . So here I will be discussing  
some  advanced  hybrid  treatment  technology  like membrane  bioreactor  and its hybridization  
with microbial  fuel cells,  moving  bed biofilm reactor  and its hybridization  with microbial  fuel 
cells.   
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:18) 
 
So in order  to start from  the beginning  if you remember , if you know  that from  the beginning  
I am discussing  about  the wastewater  that is generated  from different  human practices  has to 
be treated  before  you actually  throw  it to the or get it back  to the regular  natural  water  bodies  
right ? However , this need  to be done  in a very precise  manner , the precise  wastewater  
treatment  strategies  has to be develo ped.  
Moreover , the energy  consumption  of the wastewater  treatment  plants  are pretty  high all the 
conventional  wastewater  treatment  technology  that we have  discussed  in last two lectures , 
because  of that there  is a need  of low energy  consuming , moreover  energy producing  
waste water  treatment  systems.  So this sounds  really  ridiculous  how it is possible , how we can 
treat the wastewater  and plus you will generate  electricity  out of it Okay . I will discuss  about  
it in details  it is very interesting  I really  think you should  you will be interested  to go ahead  
with this lecture .  
Second thing So third  thing  is like the jungles  of concrete  see the pictures  Hong  Kong  city, so 
what  will happen  because  of the land availability  where  do you wanna treat you r where do 
you wanna  establish  your wastewater  treatment  unit, it will take a lot of footprint , land 
footprint  to be precise . How are you going  to develop  them  in a city like this there  is a 
possibility  of developing  some  wastewater  treatment  units  which  has a very less land 
footprint  and all.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  2:58) 
 
So to start with we will discuss  first about  the microbial  fuel cell, it is a one type of 
bioelectrochemical  systems  in any bioelectrochemical  systems  we use some  electrodes  and 
some  membrane  material  and some  biofilm . So this bio electrochemical  in this 
bioelectro chemical  systems  we have  a biopart  of living  microbiota  which  are helpful  for 
harnessing  energy  from  the wastewater  then there  will be electrode  where  the movement  of 
electricity  will be taking  place  and we will make  a proper  circle  by means  of different  change  
in structural  design  and all Okay .  
So, the first one that I will be discussing  among  all these  systems  is microbial  fuel cell. It is a 
very interesting  technology  I am very much  interest ed to showcase  you discuss  about  this 
with you in this lecture  material , so first of all if you see this structure  it has an anodic  
chamber  and the cathodic  chamber  Okay  . In the anodic  chamber  what  is happening  here 
suppose  this is the acetate  feed.  
Suppose in general  we are providing  them  with the wastewater , it has its own nutrients , there  
will be biofilm  normally  the attached  biofilm  over the surface  of the anode  which  will 
consume  this feed, this nutrient  from  the wastewater  and after consuming  it will excrete  or 
you know  as a product  there  will be a couple  of gases  or there  will be couple  of by-products  
and there  will be a couple  of ionic  byproducts  as well.  
This ionic  by products  mainly  H plus they create  the protonic  substances  and there  will be the 
excess  of electrons . This excess  of electrons  it will get attached  to the anodic  surface  and 
from  anode  it will go through  the load or resistance  towards  the cathodic  side Okay . So this 
excess  electron  how it will attach  to the surface  of the anode  I will discuss  with you in couple  of slides . So first you try to understand  the whole  process  then we will go in details , once  it 
comes  in contact  with the cathode  here normally  any terminal  electron  acceptor  in general  in 
this particular  case I have  given  the example  of oxygen ; oxygen  is acting  as a terminal  
electron  acceptor . It will consume  the electro n which  is coming  from  the anodic  chamber  to 
the cathode  chamber , it will react  with this electron  and the protons  which  are coming  
through  the proton  exchange  membrane s to the cathodic  chamber  and it will form  the H2O 
Okay .  
So by this way it will make  a compl ete cycle  and because  of that the electricity  will be the 
generated , can be harvested  here from  that load; load is nothing  but it is a resistance  it is 
simply like the electron ; electron  normally  flows  through  any electrical  appliances , how we 
can harvest  it we provide  it with some  resistance  and in the resistance  this electrical  energy  
will be converted  to some  other  form  of energy , by this way we can utilize that energy  for our 
daily  purposes  or for any other  sensory  applications  and all Okay .  
However , remember  the electricity  that that I am talking  about  in this case it is very 
minimum , there  are certain  advancement  happening  in this sector  there  are lot of researchers  
working  on it. I will be discussing  with you in details  like how that is possible  to stack  this 
kind of cell and produce  more  electricity  out of it Okay . So this is how the electricity  is 
getting  generated  while  the treatment  of wastewater  is getting  placed  in the anodic  chamber  
so, do you realize  what  we are doing , we are treating  the wastewater  plus where  we are 
generating  the electricity  out of it Okay . Now, let me  to be more  precise  to go for more  
details  I will click  on what  is happening  in the anodic  biofilm .  
(Refer  Slide  Time  07:06)  
  
 
In the anodic  biofilm , see this is the electron  transfer  mechanism  that is happening  because  of 
the respiration  process  that is happening  inside  this specific  type of microorganisms  which  
we call electroactive  microorganisms  or electrogens , so what  they do they utilize  the food or 
nutrient  and they excel  they let excess  electr ons and all.  
This excess  electrons  and excess  ions what  happens  to this excess  protons  and electrons , see 
there  is nothing  called this excess  electron  access  proton , if we talk about  the Rutherford  
model , if we talk about  the like it is the electron  cloud  model  it will be completely  different  
just to just I am saying  in is a gross  perspective  Okay . Do not take my word  in like you know 
in certain  way that so electrons  are moving  it is like a one electron  is coming  from  here it 
does not go do like this it is a portion  of charge  which  is movin g, anyway  I am not going  into 
deep  physics  discussion . So here what  we are doing  this excess  charge  is getting  accumulated  to its locomotive  organ  
what  is the locomotive  organ  in case of this bacteria  or biofilm  this flagella  they are their 
locomotive  organ and you know  this is a very standard  scientific  fact that most  of the cases  
the accumulatio n of charge  happens  when  the area is minimum  that is why we keep  this 
arrow  like structure  in the high rise buildings , so if the lightning  effect  it will capture  the 
electricity  and it will directly  grounded  to the deep  earthen  body  so that it will go to the earth  
directly  Okay .  
Why this is sharp , this things  are there  because  that is the standard  tendency  electricity  is 
normally  getting  accumulated  to the sharp  object s first Okay , I am not going  into details  
again  to the scientific  discussion  you know  it better  you have  already  passed  the class  12, we 
know  already  this basic  scientific  details .  
From there  the electrons   how to collect  that electrons  which  is in this locomotive  organs , 
how to do that, we have  this anodic  surface , see this second  picture  direct transfer  in the 
anodic  surface  when  it is getting  attached  because  of the phillion  it will get attached  to the 
anode  and by means  of that then electron  can be easily  transferred  to the anode .  
Sometimes  it may create  some  like conductive  proper  networ k of electrode , network  of a 
biofilm  and this network  of biofilm  through  their network  they can easily  network  of this 
locomotive  organs  they can supply  the electrons  to the anodic  surfac e. We can use the 
external  mediators , suppose  we have  some  type of the some  the of the microorganisms  which  
are not in attached  to the anode  but in suspended  form  inside  the anodic  reactor  Okay , so 
from  that anodic  reactor  to collect  these  electrons  there  is some type of mediator  or chemical  
substances , we normally  sometime s additionally  supply . Those chemicals  or the mediator  that 
we call this mediator  what  they do they collect  the charge  from  the electron  from  the 
microorganisms  and they supply  to the anode  surface .  
The same  way it can be transferred  through  the quorum  sensing  mechanism , nowadays  
people  are working  on quorum  sensing , how they can treat they can like kind of trick the 
microorganisms  that, so there  if you come  here you will get a food you do it like they will ask 
other  microorganisms  to come  here and put it is like they are treating  their communication  
network  and will ask them  to provide  the charge t he excess  charge  which  will be provided  to 
the anodic  surface . So this is how the things  are going  on this bacteria  which  can form  a 
community  of the anode  it is called  the biofilm  right , you see this they are making  a 
community  of microorganisms  this is how the biofilm  looks  like Okay .  From there  the biotin  produces  a matrix  that sticks  to the anode ; this sticky  matrix  consists  of 
extracellular  protein , sugar  and the bacterial  cells. Tiny conductive  nanowires  that may help 
in facilitate  the electron  conduction  are utilized  in this type of electron  transfer  processes  and 
all Okay . So again  what  will be the next, let us discuss  about  how it happens  like how this 
anodic reaction  is taking  place . In anodic reaction  in general  before  going  to the anodic  
reaction  I want  you guys  to understand  some  basic  information  about  how different  nutrients  
are being  consumed  in this microorganism  and all Okay . Say we have  carbohydr ate, protein  
and fat when  the hydrolysis  takes  place  by hydrolytic  microorganisms  they convert  it to 
sugar , amino  acids  and fatty acids  respectively .  
Then the acidogenesis  takes  place  where  these  sugars , amin o acid and fatty acids  convert  into 
different  organic  acids  like butyric  acid, propanoic  acid, alcohol , H2, carbon  dioxide  and 
ammonia . Then acetogenesis  takes  place  where  all these  products  will be converted  into 
acetic  acid, H2 and carbon  dioxide ; then there  comes  the methanogenesis  where the 
methano genic  microorganisms  mainly  it is a type of archaea , so they act on this raw materials  
and they converted  to the methane , H2 and carbon  dioxide .  
This methanogenesis  is a electron  scavenging  reaction  we do not want  the methodogenesis  to 
happen in our syste m in general  Okay  in in anodic  chamber . What we need , we need  up 
toacetogenesis,  this is a very gross  technology  I am talking  about  now it is even  scientist  I 
find that even  methanogenesis  also can be helpful  we can somehow  reverse  engineer  this, we 
can retrofit  in the system  I am not going  into the very basics , very much  advanced  details  just 
remember  that acetogenesis , methodologies  we try to avoid .  
For that there  are different  methanogenesis  suppression  techniques  are available , we can 
supply  some  addit ional  amount , some  type of plant  extracts , we can supply  some  kind of 
acidic  products , we can do the heat treatment , so how it is done  in the anodic  chamber  in 
order  to start the reactor  how to start the reactor ?  
Before  supplying  the wastewater  there  need s to be some  inoculums,  what  is inoculum  it is a 
bacterial  mass  or the microbial  mass . Where I have  to collect  it, we have  to collect  it from  say 
existing  aerobic  treatment  unit or existing  anaerobic  treatment  units  Okay . Existing  anaerobic  
treatment  units  you go you take some  sludge  from  there  because  you know  they are the 
ready -made  sludge  the elements  that mix the microorganisms  are still alive  there  you collect  
them  and proper  transporting  mechanism  you have  to utilize  and then you pour it in your 
micro bial full cell in the anodic  chamber  of microbial  fuel cell.  Make sure it is completely  closed , the lid is closed  so that there  will be no oxygen  availability  
inside  the anodic  chamber . Then you supply  drop wise or somehow  you can make  some  
arrangem ent so to supply  the sludge  or the anaerobic  microorganism  or the inoculum  into 
your system  in an anodic  chamber . Then with time when  you supply  it with the enough  
amount  of wastewater  with time the biofilm  will develop  Okay . Before  supplying  this 
inoculum  to your chamber  we go for methanogen  suppression  technique , so that there  will be 
no methanogens  present  in your system , Methanogens  are what , this is specific  type of archea  
this specifi c type of microorganisms  they use is methanogenous  phenomena .  
How to get rid of them , as I said that different  marine  algae  Chaeto and all marin e algae 
Chaeroceros,  we use lauric  acid, we use heat treatment , ultrasonication  treatment , so by using  
all this treatment  we try to get rid of the methanogen  population  in your inoculum s then you 
supply  it to your anodic  chamber  Okay . Now your anodic chamber  has the exact  amount  of 
electrogen  that you need  you know  the procedure  how it is to be collected  or how it is to be 
get attached  to the anodic  biofilm  in the anode .  
(Refer  Slide  Time 15:33)  
  
Now let us see what  is happening  in the cathode , in the cathode  when  the oxygen  is acting  as 
a terminal  electron  acceptor . So oxygen  it acts with the electrons  and protons  coming  from  
the anodic  chamber  and they form  H2O  Okay . So normally  we try to form  it in the catalyst  on 
the cathode  surface  but it is very sluggish  in nature , this oxygen  reduction  reaction  is very 
sluggish  in nature  that’s why when  it needs  to be provided  with some  catalyst .  
What catalyst  we do say platinum ; platinum  is a very standard  catalyst . Catalyst  will 
accelerate  this process  because  if the acceleration  of this process  is happening  what  will 
happen  because  of the accelerated  process  of the oxygen  reduction  reaction  the whole  cycle  
will be faster  in nature  right? . There is a scarcity  of electron  in the cathodic  side from  the 
anodic  side more  amounts  of electrons  will try to pull it up Okay .  
Just think  it as a complete  cycle , the more  you suck from  one side though  the cycle  will be 
more  interesting  and faster  and then the electricity  though  more  treatment  efficacy  can be 
increased  right? . So that is how it works  and if you see in case of oxygen  all this bond  
dissociation  energy  that is like 498 kilojoule  per mole , that is normally the  that has to be 
overcome  and that can be done  with this different  type of catalyst  material.   
So platinum  is used as a catalyst  but it is very costly , so people  are now trying  to find out, try 
to do research  on different  other  type of catalyst , cathode  catalysts  or oxygen  reduction  
reaction  catalyst  to replace  the platinum  and to work  as well as and even  better  than platinum  
with a very cheaper  way. Then there  comes  the proton  transfer  mechanism  that also I want  
you to know  that how oxygen  need  electron  and proton , so that means  protons  are also 
coming  from  the anodic  chamber . How it is coming , in general  the protons  are coming  
through  the proton  exchange  membrane , so this proton  exchange  membrane , we have  two mechanisms  that we normally  think  is their standard  Grotthuss  mechanism  and Vehicle  
mechanism . In case of Grotthuss  mechanism  what  is happening , you see this picture  in the 
left top most figure  they are just giving  charge , this proton  to one ion to another . Simply  think  
about  a water  molecule  complete  chain  of water  molecule  is there  in your proton  exchange  
membrane .  
This water  what  they are doing  they are H2O,  right  once  they get in touch  with one H plus 
and it will become  hydronium , H3 plus O, so once  they becomes  hydronium  ion what  it will 
do it will supply  to the neighboring  molecule , neighboring  H2O.  So it is like one from  
hydronium  to another  H2 it will become  hydronium  it will become  H2, so this way the H plus 
ion will migrated  from  the anodic  chamber  to the cathodic  chamber , this is called  the 
Grotthuss  mechanism .  
It is not as simple as I mentioned  Okay , there  are a lot of other  functionalities  going  on, a lot 
of other  factors  are in in this picture  but just to give you a broad  idea about  how it works  
Okay  this is called  Grotthuss  mechanism  jumping  way. Then there  comes  the Vehicle  
mechanism ; when  one water  molecule  will collect  how to say this proton  from  anodic  
chamber  and it will take it from the anodic  chamber  to the cathode  chamber  by itself , so in 
that case it will be called  vehicular  mechanism  Okay .  
So there  also this ion exchange  takes  place  but not how to say in general  these  ions will be 
migrated  through  definite  molecules  only Okay . In case of bound water  you know  what  is 
bound , water  what  is free water . If you add some  water  in say like if you have  a glass  beaker  
you have some  soil in it, you add some  water  and from  the bottom  you make  a hole when  you 
add some  water  from  above  what  will happen  because of the gravitational  force  most  of the 
water  will go through  it. Right?   
After you say put like after 10 ml of water  almos t 9 ml of water  will go through  hole as free 
water  that is called  the free water . That means  the water  is free in nature  that is moving  
through  the gravitational  force  or some  other  external  physical  sources  means  of forces  right . 
Then what  will happen  to the rest of the 1 ml, it actually  gets attached  to the surface  of the 
soil particles , so that is what  we call the bound  water . See these  bound  waters  are very hard to 
well it depends  there  are other  type of water  also but bond  water  in general  they are the one 
who are responsible  for Grotthuss  mechanism . They will collect  the electrons  protons  from  
one side and then they will supply  to the other , so bond  waters  are normally  fascinated  the proton  transfer  Grotthuss  mechanism  and free water  does it for the vehicle  mechanism  Okay . 
So that is how the protons  are being  connected  to the cathodic  chamber .  
(Refer  Slide  Time  20:54)  
 
  
Now what  is happening  when  we talk about  the voltage  losses , voltage  losses  is like how this 
matter  is coming  into the play, this is a term called  very important  term we call it over 
potential  losses . In general  theoretically  speaking  suppose  for a particular  amount  of 
wastewater  which has a particular  amount  of nutrient  it may give you say 1.1 or 1.2 volt of 
potential  difference  has to be there  Okay .  
However , this voltage  cannot  be attained  by your microbial  fuel cells because  of different  
kind of losses , different  type of resistances  or over potential  losses  we call it Okay . There are 
activation  laws, there  are atomic  over potentia l loss, there  are concentration  over potential  
loss, so because  of different  losses  in cathodic  chamber , in anodic  chamber , in the electrode , 
in the conducting  wire and all also at the load or the resistances .  
So because  of that this different  kind of losses are happening  Okay  I am not going  into details  
of it I am just giving  you this idea that why we cannot  achieve  the desired  level  of potential  
difference  that we are expecting  theoretically  in case of microbial  fuel cell, these  are the 
losses  that becau se of this only.  
So we already  know  how it works  in general  Okay , so let us think  about  what  are the 
applications  and uses of it Okay , we use this for waste  disposal , we use MFC  for water  
treatment , for powering  the remote  power  supplies  where  human  being  cannot  go and there  is 
of no possibility  of wiring  system  connection  or wire, you just simply  design  a micro bial full 
cell, which  will keep  on giving  you enough  energy  for running  that particular  appliances .  
Same for medical  devices , nowadays  people  are researching  on medical  devices  where  this 
microbial  fuel cell is powered  by human  sweat , human  urine  and all these  things  and because  of that the treatment  of that the treatment o f this  sweat  and urine  that is used as a you know  
supply  of it is like a fuel for microbial  fuel cell, it is like just like we use petrol  diesel  this 
human  sweats  and the urine  that these  are used as a fuel human  excreta  is used as a fuel and it 
is called  bioelectric  toilet  also that is being  developed  in India also in different  places in the 
world  also people  are working  on it right  now.  
So in this microbial  full cell this is used as a feed and then this organisms  this microorganism  
they conduct  the electricity  and this electricity  is sufficient  enough  if you device  it correctly  
sufficient  enough  to run the remote  power  supplies , different  biosensors , for medical  devices  
and chips  and all to implant  inside  our body  and all, also for teaching  a new thing  in our 
research  purpose  for sure.  
What are the negative  side of the picture , scale up is still a big challenge  Okay ; if it is not by 
this time you might  have  seen like microbial  fuel cell everywhere  like you just have  
wastewater  you treat it and that is it you treat the wastewater  plus you will have  a electricity  
out of it, but scaling up is a big challenge , field scale  applications  are still under  research  and 
there  are a lot of physical  applications  still going  on and people  are doing  it successfully  but 
still it is considered  as cutting -edge technology  with a low TRL  level . To be in order  to reach  
high TRL,  TRL  technology  readiness  level  and all  ,so if it is needs  to be high enough  for 
mass  applications  some  still some  research  has to be done  and it has to be well added  to the 
bio demand  Okay .   
High cost of cation  exchange  membran e or the proton  exchange  membrane s, potential  of 
biofouling  is there  so you have  to repetitively  clean  the electrodes , high internal  resistance  to 
power  generation  limits  is the practical  application  of MFC . All these  factors  are actually  still 
limiting  the practical  applications  but research  are going  on there  are plenty  of research , 
plenty  of papers  and patents  are available , people  are working  on commercial  level  practices  
also now for different  like you know  low energy  uptake  in devices  and all so there  definitely  
will be a good  part of it we will see in near future .  (Refer  Slide  Time  25:22)  
 
 
 Some more  cons like some  more  negative  part the disadvantage  existing  high cost cathode  
catalyst  material  for MFC  application  needs  to be repla ced with the novel low cost 
alternatives , researchers  are going  on on this field and I want  you guys  to why I am more  
focusing  on providing  some  disadvantages  also so that you will come  up as a scientist  or 
researcher  in near future  and you will come  up with this idea how to go ahead  with the further  
research  and make  it possible  for physical  application  or real life applications . Existing  
proton  exchange  membrane s used in MFC  are mechanically  also weak , so we have  to find out 
some  mechanically  strong  proto n exchange  mem brane.   
Integrating  the bioelectro  chemical  systems  like MFC  with MBR  therefore  can be a game  
changer  for medium  strength  wastewater  like fish processing  wastewater  and all . That is what  
we re going  to discuss  in in a couple  of slides  later that why integration  is important  in these  
bio-electrochemical  systems . Before  discussing  about  the integration , this is the membrane  
bioreactor  if you see it also this is also aerobic , in general  MBR  is aerobic  treatment  process  
but anaerobic  MBR  is also available .  
When we talk about  the standard  aerobic  treatment  processes  like say activated  sludge  
process  we discussed  in last lecture  right? , in activated  sludge  process  we have  solid  removal , 
we have  this aeration  basin  and then there  is settler . Before  that we have  this primar y 
sedimentation , primary  treatment  units  then sand filtration  and disinfection  all this tertiary  
unit is also required .  
In case of MBR  you are doing  all the secondary  and tertiary  treatment  in a single  module  it is 
possible , how it is done ? Instead of aeration,  after aeration  you can simply  put it through  the 
membrane,  ultra filtration  membrane,  micro  filtration  movement  or nano  filtration  membrane  
or you can simply  put it inside  the aeration  basin  also and then you apply  the negative  
pressure  and suction  pressure  because  of suction  because  the water  will go through  this filter  
material  and because  of this filtering  membrane  they can filter  out all the unwanted  materials  
and the water  which  will be coming  out of the system  is free of all the pollut ants and all . So it 
is doable  and it is not only doable  but it is practiced  all over the world  it is very famous  it is a 
very standard  technology .  
However , the membrane  comes  with a very high energy  requirement  that is also that is one of 
the drawbacks  of this system , because  to run the pump  it needs  a huge  amount  of energy . So 
in order  to minimize  this energy  requirement  and all these  things  why not we go for 
combination  of MFC -MBR  systems , just to give you a thought  this bio-electochemical  systems  it is good  for bioelectricity  produc tion, it is a pollution  free, low in low power  input , 
lower  power  output  rather  it will provide  with the power . If you see this Venn diagram  this 
biological  treatment , membrane  filtration  and electrochemical  systems  if you see the 
overlapping  regions  betwe en biochemical , biological  and electrochemical , its 
bioelectrochemi cal system  overlapping  between  membrane  filtration  and biological  treatment  
it is a membrane  bioreactor . Overlapping  between  membrane  filtration  and electroche mical  
system  is the membrane  assista nt in electrocoagulations .  
Overlapping  between  three  of the Venns  it is considered  is what  we are targeting , it will give 
us all the prosper  possible , it will give us a high quality  effluent,  low sludge  production , 
valuable byproduct  recovery , bioelectric ity generation , pollution  free, membrane  falling  
control , sludge  reduction  a lot of a lot of  possible  advantages  can be possible  if we try to 
think  about  researching  or try to think  about  you know  find out some  solutions  which  will act 
as a bioelectrical  system  plus membrane  bioreactor , it is a hybrid  system  design  of a hybrid  
system  which  will act as a wastewater  treatment  unit plus it will provide  us some  
bioelectricity  that will reduce  or somehow  try to neutr alize  or at least somehow  like you 
know  somehow  reduce  the overa ll energy  requirement  of the MBR .  
(Refer  Slide  Time  29:33)  
  
Second  thing , second  discussion  the second  type of treatment  unit that I want  to discuss  is 
like moving  bed biofilm  reactor . What is movin g bed biofilm  reactor,  in general  it is either  
aerobic  or anoxic  depending  upon  our applications  so mostly  it is aerobic  in nature  mostly  we 
use in aerobic  MBBR,  in case of aerobic  MBBR  or we provide  it with the aerator  you see in 
the picture  and there  is this bio media , this is plastic  based  biofilm  medias  are they are 
floating  around  because  of the aerator  it is floating  around  inside  the reactor  and it is a perfect  
ground  for attached  biofilm  growth , because  it has a very high specific  surface  area you see 
they have  a very high, there  are like lot of nodes  a lot of protrusions  and all .  
So it will give high amount  of specific  surface  area for biofilm  to grow  on its surface . When 
there  is higher  specific  surface  area; when  there  is a like high amount  of biofilm  are growing  
on its surface  it will consume  more  amount  of pollutants  isn’t it?. That is why MBBR  is a 
very it is considered  as a very standard , it is a very high-end technology , nowadays  people  are 
using  in wastewater  treatment , in water  treatment  units and also if you properly  design  it is 
possible  to incorporate  it with the MBR  systems , moving  membrane  bioreactor  systems .  
If you add it with the membrane  bioreactor  systems  it will give you high quality  effluent  
Okay  and we can get rid of all the problems  that we are associating  with other  technologies  
Okay  and if it is added  with the MFC  then is also for sure it is good  because  it will give you 
some  additional  electricity  generation  also.  
So as a takeaway  message  we can say that the BES technology  bioelectro chemical  system  
can replace  the existing  wastewater  treatment  technologies  after overcoming  some  major  
concerns  that we have  discussed , but it has some  possibilities  it has shown  a lot of 
applications  already  all over the world . However , we will discuss  more  about  the BES technology  more  in details  in coming  lecture , here we already  discussed  only microbial  fuel 
cell Okay . Later we will be discussing  more  about  other  applications  of BES technology  as 
well, and then we will see how we can utilize  all this technology  for aquaculture  purpose , 
how we can utilize  this technology  for aquaculture  wastewater  treatment , how we can utilize  
it for fish processing  wastewater  treatment  Okay .  
Hybridization  of these  technologies  with MBR  or MBBR  can be a game  changer  for 
application  in aquaculture  practices , so that is what  we are going  to target  and we are going to 
this lecture material  this module  is I designed  it in such a way so that it will make  you think  
further  it is not something  that you only know  some  bookish  knowledge  or what  is already  
there  it is just to give you some  idea about  what  is the existing  research  going  on in all over 
the world  in this type of field and how we can involve  yourself  in future  to be the person  who 
is responsible  for like you know coming  out with some  advanced  technology , which  can treat 
the wastewater  plus generate  the electricity  for solving  different  purposes  Okay  and also and 
it will reduce  the global  warming  and it will also help in the environment  in general  Okay .  
So that is it for the day and I will discuss  more  about  it this different  kind of bioelectro 
chemical   systems  in coming  lecture . In the next lecture  only and there we will discuss  about  
how it can be utilized  in aquaculture  systems  also Okay , thank  you so much  see you in the 
next lecture .  