Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 36  
Overview of Wastewater Treatment Methods  
Hello everyone, welcome to the first lecture of module 8 technology of water treatment, my  
name is Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick; I am from the department of agriculture and food  
engineering of IIT Kharagpur. So in this particular lecture I will be disc ussing about the  
overview of wastewater treatment methods.  
(Refer Slide Time 00:44)  
 
 
So the concept that I will be covering here the water treatment method different type of  
wastewater  and water treatment method ,elements of plant design and analysis and design,  
primary treatment units like bar screens, grit chamber, skimming tank and primary  
sedimentation tank. So before we start I want to  discuss with I want to  let you know one very 
important information  first is when we talk about the treatment of water it can be two 
types, Okay  so basically it can be of  water treatment or waste water treatment. What is the 
difference between that; obviously that  one is waste water and is water, but the reason is suppose 
you have a city you are coming  from a municipality or a region so  Okay  in that municipality 
region or the city region, city area  what happened whatever the wastewater that you are 
generating day basis that is  going  through a canal, so some particular conduit system or channel 
it will go to a particular area  and then it is getting treated, after the treatment is done then only 
it is it get back to the river, surface water bodies. Okay  
The waste water treatmen t is very important, so here the treatment that we are talking about it  
is a wastewater treatment. What is water treatment in general? When we again take the water  
from the surface any surface water bodies say river, lakes or something and then we treat the  
water for  the human consumption to make it in a for human or any other purpose irrigation  
purpose or any other purpose that is called water treatment, simple water treatment.  
So we treat the water and then we supply to the municipality area or say f or your irrigation  
channels. So then it is called the water treatment in general  Okay , so when we talk about water  
treatment here we are actually mainly talking about the wastewater treatment in general  Okay . 
Look at here in this particular lecture serie s, why? Because our concern is first important  
information that we need to provide here that the water which is used for rearing of  aquaculture 
species is getting polluted very easily; that polluted water has to be treated for  further use. Isn’t 
it? 
So that is the major concern, the water that is required for our aquatic farm is also important  
and that is also taken under consideration and we can also somehow relate that water  treatment 
as well that the water which is coming from the surface water w e you have to treat  it properly, 
so to supply it to your farm.  Okay  Then whatever the waste water your farm is  generating that 
has to be treated as well; that treatment can be done before supplying that  before throwing that 
water to surface water bodies  or you can use it for again in your farm  itself that is called 
recirculated aquaculture systems. right  The wastewater that has been generated  from your farm 
you treat it and then again you use it in your system in your f arm. Okay  So, all  these methods 
involve certain treatment processes and operations  Okay . So why I say this two  different terms 
operations and processes?  
I think you already know operations when we talk about it is mostly related to some physical  
force or physical action  Okay , but proces ses when we discuss the unit processes, unit processes  means it comes with some chemical changes  Okay ; chemical or biological changes that is the  
processes when we talk about unit processes and unit operations if some physical force or  
physical action i s being taken place, and by means of this unit operations are unit processes  you 
treat the water or waste water based on  your you know  which way you were treating it for your 
farming  purpose as well. This treatment method are normally divided into very b asic three 
categories  first one that we call primary treatment, then secondary treatment and tertiary 
treatment. What is primary treatment?  
It refers to some physical unit operations which are done for some basic purposes  Okay I tell 
you, I am giving a very gross idea now with the coming lectures coming slides I will give you 
a more  detailed idea about what is it all about. Physical primary treatment What we do in 
primary treatment, we use some unit  operations process to get rid of the higher sized or say like 
unwanted particles which are having  higher than a particular amount, a threshold size  and all  
and mainly they can be plastic, rags, the  sample sachet. So these are the very standard thing 
that we can easily remove using primary  treatment unit.  
We can remove oil and grease from using the primary treatment unit, we can remove certain  
type of solids also from the primary treatment unit, the solid of having a particular specific  
gravity limit that we can easily treat using the pr imary treatment methods  Okay . So primary  
treatment is a gross process, it is a procedure by which we can get rid of the most of the  
unwanted particles or the  the how to say the  stuff that we do not need in our follow -up treatment 
units and  because those  things which cannot be treated in follow -up treatment units as well so 
in order  to and also it will reduce the load in follow -up treatment units so primary treatment 
units that  is why we introduce the primary treatment units.  
Then there comes the secon dary treatment unit; secondary treatment units are mostly they are  
the chemical or biological unit processes are used. This chemical and biological unit  processes 
they convert the chemical energy present in the waste water to some other form of  energy 
mostly they have converted to their biomass  Okay , I mean like mostly the chemical energy  that 
is present into their body is converted into, they consume it and they actually this waste  this 
nutrient actually used to utilize for their improvement of their biomass. What will happen  then, 
why we try to introduce to the biomass, this is a very advanced process I would say  like you 
now. See  the nutrient which is present in the waste water or the water in general those nutrients 
we cannot consume it at all  right?, suppose our the drain and the water that is there in the drain 
or higen  or you know this municipality canals those are actually rich source of nutrient but not 
meant for us we cannot consume it, but there are a lot of different there are protein carbo hydrate  lipids present there but not in a way that we can consume right?  
So what we do, we use it for the microorganisms who can utilize them; they utilize them they  
use them as a feed and they can grow by themselves. So once they can grow by themselves  they 
convert into the biomass all these nutrients, what will happen because of that the nutrient  load 
will go down nutrient load means pollutant load will go down from t he waste water and  also 
that biomass we can easily harvest that biomass and that is a very rich source of  fertilizers, also 
we can use this we normally call it sludge that can also be used for different  purposes and by 
means of this we can easily segreg ate the nutrient from the wastewater, you  understand the 
procedure, how it works.  Okay  Now there comes a tertiary treatment; tertiary  treatment is 
normally referred to as a one or combination of like two or three physical unit  operations or 
chemical or biological unit processes used after the secondary treatment and  what is the purpose 
for it?  
First of all to get rid of the material still available after the secondary treatment is done, to get  
rid of the pathogenic microorganisms because there is a chance of pathogenic  microorganisms 
in the wastewater  and all , to get rid of them we can introduce UV, ozone treatment,  etc. to get 
rid of the you know any follow -up contamination, cross contact follow -up contamination in  the 
water body so that is why we sometimes cover it with the chlorine and that residual  chlorine 
that is present in the water can still make the water  you know  portable or drinkable for larger  
period of time. So this is just to give you some gross idea about how these different treatment  
units and treatment process, unit processes and unit operations work and why this is called  
primary, secondary and tertiary treatment  Okay . In general the individual treatment methods  
normally are classified in physical unit operation, chemical unit processes and biological unit  
processes.  
(Refer Slide Time 09:28)   
As we already discussed here I am giving you more details about it. Physical unit operation, I  
told you the application of physical forces predominance and majorly based on the physical  
forces like in this kind of operations, what kind of operations can be classified under this, can  
be considered under this physical unit operation? Screening, mixing, flocculation,  
sedimentation, floatation, filtration  Okay , so all this treatment all these operations can be  
considered as physical unit operation because you are using some physical forces,  which  you 
are  applying some physical forces to get rid of certa in products or certain materials, certain  
elements from your water body or wastewater body.  Okay   
Chemical unit processes, normally removal or conversion of contaminant is bought by the  
addition  of chemicals or by other chemical reaction, for example, precipitation, gas transfer, 
adsorption, disinfection, all this unit processes are considered as chemical unit processes, 
why? It involves with some addition of chemicals or some chemical reaction i s taking place  
because of that your pollutant load can be minimized or reduced.  
Third is a biological unit process, what is biological unit processes? Removal of contaminants  
is brought about by the biological activity like to remove the biodegradable o rganic  substances 
from the wastewater either in colloidal and dissolved form, this biodegradable  organic 
substances means, what do I mean by biodegradable, it is degraded by some  biological matter, 
it is possible some biological living being  and all rig ht ?. So what they do, they consume  that 
organic substances from the water and they can reduce the pollutant load. In the  biological unit 
process organic matter is converted into gases that can escape into the  atmosphere or into the 
bacterial cell, whic h can be removed by settling phenomena. Easy enough, organic matter is 
present so it is converted into either gas or either bacterial cell, if it  is in under pump into the 
gas if it is converted into the gas it can easily escape to the  atmosphere and if it is converted to 
the bacterial cell that can easily be removed by settling  phenomena in a later stage of the 
treatment unit. Okay  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:50)  
 
I will give you more details about all these things, but before that you need to understand  some 
elements of our treatment plant analysis and design. When you will be designing a  water 
treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant some very basic elements you need to  understand 
before you go for designing. Flow sheet, it is a graphical represen tation of the  particular 
combination of unit operation and processes you are going to use in your treatment  unit. You 
need to design that graphical; you need to first decide what are the units you will be  used, what 
are the unit operations or processes you need to use for the treatment of your  waste water or 
water? Based on that you have to represent it in graphically which will be  called flow sheet.  
Process loading criteria or design criteria is very important. This criterion is used on the basis  
of sizing the individual unit operation and also known as process loading criteria, why  because 
suppose your waste water has a characteristic of say  like 200 milligram per liter of COD  Okay . 
So just say it is a only it is having a 200 milligram per liter of  COD on an average, based on  
that you have to design your system. All of a sudden suppose you think like, no I will design  
my system no matter what what is the process load is you design it for 100 milligram per liter  
capacity, what will happen your des ign will be overloaded with the organic matter  
concentration  right , because COD load is 200 milligram per liter for your inlet wastewater or 
inlet  water. However, your design is optimized for 100 milligram per liter, so it will not work 
so  you have to design your system based on the input load, what is the input load here? The  
organic matter, the inorganic matter or the pollutant load, whatever whatever the pollutant  load 
it is.  
Based on these couple of factors there are all the water quality parameters that I have  discussed 
in earlier lectures, those parameters has to be taken into consideration before designing before 
going  for design  and all . So those will be called process l oading, based on the process loading 
you have to  design your treatment units a and all Okay . Solid balance; you have to determine 
the amount of solid that is  entering to your systems and that will be leaving through your 
system.  
That solid balance you ha ve to determine very cautiously, because based on that only your  unit 
operations will be loaded accordingly  Okay . Hydraulic profile; it is used to identify the  
elevation of the free surface of waste water as it flows through the various treatment units. If  
you do not know the hydraulic profile suppose you have a primary treatment then secondary  
treatment and tertiary treatment, so each time you have to do the pumping because it is in  
different elevation level.  
Whereas, you can just  do you can just  elevate the water a particular reservation in your reservoir 
and then  you put the primary then secondary then tertiary, what will happen it will go through 
because  of gravitational action; you do not have to worry about much of an energy consumption  
because your energy consumption because of the pumping system will be reduced, so  hydraulic 
profile is very important when you design a plant  Okay . Plant layout in general it is a  spatial 
arrangement of the physical facilities of the treatment plant identi fied in the flow  sheet. That 
plant layout has to be designed properly with each and every component of your  facilities that 
you will be providing.  
(Refer Slide Time 15:22)  
 
This is the process flow sheet of a conventional domestic sewage treatment plant. Here I will  
mainly be focusing on sewage treatment plant rather than aquaculture treatment plant in the  
beginning, just for you guys to understand the system in general how  the treatment is taking  
place then we will narrow it down to aquaculture in the coming lecture. First we will be  
discussing the things in general what are the treatment unit operations and unit processes  
involved in a treatment unit and for different i ndustrial purpose, municipality purpose. Then  
we will narrow it down to aquaculture purpose  Okay , so the first the process flow sheet if you 
see it  is clearly divided into primary treatment and the secondary treatment.  
Primary treatment the first thing is you see the raw waste water is coming, the screening is  
taken place, grit chamber; then primary sedimentation tank or PST then biological reactor  
which is coming under secondary treatment then secondary settling tank and then it is the  
treated wastew ater is going out. A lot of recycling is happening here, the treated wastewater  
from the primary sedimentation tank can be supplied to the treated, I mean like the sludge  from 
the primary sedimentation tank or which we call primary sludge can be supplied  to the  
anaerobic digester.  
The same way secondary sludge from the secondary sedimentation tank at the last it can also  
divert it to the anaerobic digester, what they do this anaerobic digester it will use this this  sludge 
coming from the settling tank  primary settling or the secondary settling tanks, it will  utilize it 
and it will convert it to the different kind of different bio gases and the final digester  sludge 
can be used for you know fertilizer for fertilizing purposes as a manure if you can ad d it with  
your soil you know in your ground in your field.  
The supernatant which is again more liquidified liquefied portion that will be going to the  PST 
again  Okay ; then again the treatment will continue. This whole system every single unit has its  
own capacity of working  Okay , I will be discussing with you in details in the coming slides so 
just  for you to understand how it works first raw waste water is coming, screening is taking 
place, why we do first why we do screening?  
Screening is the major  way of getting rid of the particles, unwanted larger size particles, the  
larger size particles which cannot be treated in a follow -up treatment unit. So we just simply  
screen it and we can just simply screen the water which is coming out of this the eff ect from  
the screen chamber will come to grit chamber; grit chamber is for grit removal sorry grit 
chamber is normally for the grit removal.  
The grits which is having the solids which are having less than 2.65 specific gravity, I will 
discuss with you in  detail in the coming slide. Then PST, sedimentation tank from the name  
only you can understand, whatever the solids still present in the water can somehow be  
neutralized, suspended solid specifically that suspended solids can somehow be sedimented if  you wait sufficient amount of time it will sedimented the water from I mean like the solids  from 
the water body and it can be sedimented and that sedimented sludge can be separated  out; that 
is that will be called primary sludge  right? .  
So whatever the water coming out of primary settling tank it is free of, not completely free of  
it will have a  very reduced amount of suspended solids  Okay . Then it will come to the 
biological  reactor because still the dissolved solids are available whic h is in most of the 
organic form or inorganic form that organic or inorganic mostly the organic dissolved solid 
has to be treated  in biological reactor.  
Biological reactor Then in biological reactor these solid will be converted into biomass what 
will ha ppen, the  water which will be coming out is almost like clean water, but it will have 
some bacterial biomass  and to get rid of the bacterial biomass you have secondary 
sedimentation tank or SST. In the  secondary sedimentation tank if you let it stay the re for a 
certain amount of time, because of  the gravitational action all the biomass will get settled in 
the bottom of the sedimentation  tank. So water which will be coming out will be called treated 
water or treated wastewater  which can have a very low  amount of organic content or low 
amount of pollutant load. That  is how the treatment is taking place Okay; you understand the 
procedure now we will go through  more in details Okay.  
(Refer Slide Time 20:07)  
 
 
To start with the primary treatment unit  like normally we separate the floating materials and 
also  the heavy settelable organic or on inorganic solids. This treatment can reduce the 
biochemical  oxygen load or BOD oxygen demand or the BOD of the waste water by about 15 
to 30  percent age Okay . These operations are used for mainly the operations which we use 
screening I told  you first screening to remove the floating paper, rags, clothes, etc. grit chamber 
or detritus tank for removing the grit and sand particles or larger size suspended solids, 
skimming tanks  for removing the oil and grease and primary settling tanks is provided for 
removal of residual  suspended matter  Okay .  
The organic solids which are separated out of the sedimentation tank can be used as manure 
after drying in a sludge drying bed or by some other means. That organic solid is very rich in  
different organic constituents and because of that it can be used as much enriched manure for  
irrigation purposes  and all .  
The first unit operations that we will be discussed about is the bar screen; from this figure  itself 
you can see both the example in the right. The first one is this automatic and the second  one is 
the manual one if you see how it works, it is placed the screens are placed at a certain inclination  
certain angle and because of this and either by mechanical by the manual one if you see these  
manual racks or the mechanical racks how they are doing the y are cleaning the whatever the  
debris which are higher in size they are collecting in a certain solid concentrator or manually 
you can collect it after a certain moment of time.  
So you can see mostly the inclination angle and from this is the particular inclination angle  that 
you have to cover it with otherwise there is a high chances of clogging Okay and also there is  
will be a certain drop just after the screen we normally pro vide it with a certain drop or certain  
elevation just to give the certain hydraulic movement close to velocity to maintain the flow  
through velocity through the screen. Okay  
(Refer Slide Time 22:30)  
 
 
 
So in general the wastewater which is entering this screening channel should have a  minimal 
minimum self -clearing velocity of 0.375 meter per second, these are very important  
information that you need to remember and also the velocity should not rise to such an extent  
that it will dislodge the screening from the bar.  
So the minimum self cleaning velocity has to be there but it should not be more than that  Okay . 
The  slope of the hand -cleaned screen should be around 30 to 45 degrees with the horizontal 
but in  case of mechanical it can be 45 to 80 degree more inclined  Okay . So that it will keep on 
collecting  the racks very easily I mean like the larger particles very easily.  
Submerged area of the surface of the screen in general including bar and opening should be  
around to at least 200 percentage of the cross -sectional area of the extract sewer for separate  
sewers and 300  percent  for the combined sewers. What do I mean by c ombined sewers, separate  
sewers? In a sewer line we normally treat, the line which we normally use for treatment of; for 
transportation of the waste water it can be connected with the rain water harvesting line  also 
rain water harvesting line so the rain  water intrusion can also take place which will be  called 
as combined sewers or normally in normal sewers separate sewers where rain water  harvesting 
lines are different and rain water, storm water line is different and the regular waste water line  
is different, municipality water line is different that is called separate sewers, and for  combined 
saver it should be it means like it is a dual purpose sewer line.  
Clear spacing of bar for hand cleaned bar screens may be from 25 to 15 millimeter and that  for 
mechanically cleaned bar it may range from 15 millimeter to 75 millimeter. That means  the 
difference between two spacing between two bars would be this is the range for it. The  width 
of the bar facing the flow may be 8 millimeter to a 15 millimeter a nd the depth may  vary from 
the 25 millimeter to 75 millimeter.  
Second unit operations that we will be discussing about is the grit chamber; grit chamber is  
designed  to remove the grit which are having a space which is normally the solid materials  
which have the specific gravity of about 2.65 Okay  which is much greater than those of organic  
solids present in the wastewater. In this chamber particle settles as indiv idual entity and there  
is no interaction between the neighboring particles, because they are simply different grit 
particles and they simply settle down as a as an individual entity.  
This kind of settling we call it free settling or zone one settling  Okay, remember this thing this 
is  called the free settling phenomena or zone settling phenomena  Okay . In case of horizontal 
flow grit chambers in general all the grit particles of size 0.2 millimeter or more in diameter 
should  reach the bed of the channel p rior to reaching to the outlet end, because it will flow 
like this; still the flow is there a certain amount of flow is maintained in the grit chamber. So 
the grit of  particular 0.2 millimeter or more if the diameter it should be designed in such a 
way th at it  should reach the bottom of the channel prior to reaching to the outlet end.  
Because if the flow is more than a certain threshold limit the grit particles will reach to the  
outlet  end and it will go with the effluent we do not need that we want it to be settled  right , so 
that  is why it has to be designed in such a way. The width in general it should be kept 
between 1 millimeter to 1.5 millimeter, sorry 1 meter to 1.5 meter, depth  of flow should be 
normally  kept shallow, and you know the reason  right . If it is more than certain limit or if it is 
like much  shallower both are not good it has to be kept shallow, but not very shallow or not 
very deep. The total depth of the channel a  freeboard of around 0.3 meter and a grit space 
accumulation  
zone of around 0.25 meter has to be provided so that after it reaches the 0.25 meter of  
accumulation grit zone then you have to collect it manually or mechanically based on your  
design.  
For larger plants two or more grit chambers are parallelly used with a recommended  detention 
time of 30 to 60 seconds that means for that detention time is for that particular  moment of 
time any water molecule was present in that particular chamber. What  do you  mean by bottom 
molecule, suppose you have a 1 liter size of grit chamber just to give you an  example, 1 liter 
size of grit chamber your inflow velocity is 0.5 liter per hour or say 0.5 liter  per minute.  
If it is 0.5 liter per minute, so for how  long do you think the water will stay here? For two  
minutes, because if this size is 1 liter the size of this grit chamber is 1 liter and the inflow velocity is 0.5 liter per minute so that means the water will stay here in the chamber for two  
minutes  Okay. The same way if you want to make it 30 to 60 the inflow velocity should be as 
same  as the grit chamber or slightly  more than that.  
What does that mean, if the size is 1 liter, the volume of this chamber is 1 liter, your inflow  
velocity should be 1 liter per second or say like maximum 2 liter per second if it is 2 liter per  
second the for  many for  how long the water can stay inside the chamber, for 30 seconds  right? . 
So the volume  of this chamber is important you need to know and based on that the flow 
velocity has to be  maintained, you understand the point and this time is required for settling of 
the grit. So this  much time you have to at least provide to systems so that the settling of grit 
can be taken place.  
(Refer Slide Time 28:35)  
 
Third is the skimming tank, how skimming tank works? In general the floating solid  materials 
such as soap, vegetables, debris, fruits, beans, pieces of corks, etc and also the  specifically the 
oil and greases in general they can be removed from the waste  water using the  skimming tank. 
How the skimming tank works, if you see this picture a skimming tank it is  
 actually a chamber it is designed for which we can use it for floating matter to rise and  
remain on the surface for a long period. Okay  
When it i s in the surface for long period by means of providing aeration and also air diffusers, 
anyway once this floating matters is in the surface for long there is a particular type of 
management we  call skimmer. So this surface skimmers it will skim out this m aterials, all 
this floating solid  materials, all the oil and grease from its surface that is why we call it 
skimming tank, you  understand.  
Skimming tank is used to get rid of the floating solid materials like soap, vegetables, debris  
which are like you know greasy in nature and also the oil and grease in general so that can be 
easily  collected from the when it will be floating on the surface it can easily collected from the 
surface  Okay . In  general to prevent the heavy solids from settling on the b ed, compressed air 
is blown through  the diffuser placed on the floor of the tank.  
These diffusers will keep on supplying the aeration  and all , this aeration not only help 
preventing the  heavy solid settling in the chamber, but also it will help to float  all the oil and 
grease particles  in the surface of the water body, I mean like all this floating solid matters in 
the surface of the  water body and then it can be easily collected through the skimmers.  
Fourth important thing that we need to know that t here are different other units as well Okay  
I am just giving you a broad perspective of the major primary treatment units, major unit  
operations that is taking place in the treatment units, any treatment plant  and all Okay , water 
treatment  plant or wastewater treatment. Fourth one is the primary sedimentation tank; this is 
a very  important one. Primary sedimentation tank is what it also used as sedimentation from 
the  name only you can understand, what do I mean by the se dimentation tank?  
That means the water when it comes to this primary sedimentation tank it has enough time so  
whatever the suspended solid still present in the waste water can be settled down  Okay . Mainly 
the  lightweight  organic matter can be easily settled down in the sedimentation tank  Okay  and 
objective  of this treatment is like sedimentation to remove the readily settelable solids and the 
floating  materials that is to reduce the suspended solid content when they wil l be used in the  
biological, they will be come in contact with the biological treatment unit.  
Because biological treatment  we want to , in order to make it more efficient we have to treat all 
the  suspended solid possibly before it reaches the biological t reatment units  Okay . Most of the  
substances are a solid unit that is possible by utilizing the primary treatment unit  Okay , primary  
treatment tank. Their function is to reduce the load on the biological treatments, you can see  
the size, the influence is  coming from the center it is going throughout the circular motion  
towards I mean like to the circular tank or the you can see the circular tank in the left side is a  
standard hard design of primary simulation tank water is coming from the center and it will  go 
into the outer side.  
Outside they have a we ir like structure w eir is like this is called the effluent w ier, if you see  the 
effluent it is written effluent wi er. It is like stair -like structure so water will go and it will  
overflow through this wier and it will be collected through a collecting unit or collecting  main 
channel  and all Okay . Some information is very important in order to know more about the  
sedimentation tank. Primary se dimentation tank usually designed for a flow through velocit y  
of 1 centimeter per second at an average rate of flow, detention period of around 90 to 150  
minutes may be used for design and this tanks may be square, circular, rectangular in plan, but 
the depth has to be varying between 2.3 to 5 meter.  
Diameter of  the circular tank may be up to 40 meter  Okay  based on your load of your system  
mainly for the municipality purpose it has to be very big because the incoming waste water is  
very the incoming water is very huge  right? . The width of the rectangular tank m ay be 10 to 25 
meter and the length may be up to  100 meter, but to avoid the water currents due to wind, 
length is limited to 40 meter only we  do not go for more than 100 meter of length. The slope 
of the sludge hopper in this tank is  generally 2 : 1. A slope of 1 percent is normally provided 
at the bed of rectangular tank  and 7.5 to 10 percent for circular tank. This slope is necessary so that the solids may slide to  the bottom by gravity and we can easily collect it from a same line.  
(Refer Slide Tim e 33:52)  
 
 
So in conclusion we discuss about the primary sedimentation tank mainly in this lecture, in  the 
coming lecture I will be discussing more about the secondary treatment unit and the  tertiary 
treatment unit Okay and  how it is and then we will narrow it down for the aquaculture  practices. 
Primary sedimentation tank are mainly used to separate the floating materials that  we know 
and also the heavy settelable organic and inorganic solid.  
The organic solids which are separated out in the sedimentation tank in primary unit can be  
used as a manure after drying on sludge drying bed or some other means that also we understand 
from  this lecture. So take away message from this lecture mainly the operations used are 
screeni ng  in case of primary treatment unit, screening for removing of floating paper, rags and 
clothes,  
grit chamber or detritus tank for removing grits and sand of around for specific gravity of  
2.65 Okay .  
Skimming tanks for removing oil and grease particles in general and primary settling tank to  
provide the removal of residual suspended matter in sedimentation it will be sedimented and  
could be easily collected  Okay . So that is how the primary sedimentat ion primary unit’s 
treatment  units work. Now the water will go to the secondary treatment unit and we will discuss 
about  the secondary treatment and tertiary treatment unit in the coming lecture  Okay .  
So in the coming lecture we will discuss more in det ails about all the follow -up treatments 
units and then we will discuss about how aquaculture or aquaculture food processing  
treatment plants because aquaculture treatment processing units are also important. So how  
they are involved with it and how the t reatment can be done in this particular case  Okay , so 
thank  you so much. See you in the next lecture.  