Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture  39 
Bio-Electrochemical Sy stem -based Wastewater Treatment (Contd.)  
Hello everyone, welcome to th e fourth lecture of module -8, bio-electro chemical system based 
(aqua)  wastewater system wastewater treatment for aquaculture, aquaculture sector in general . 
My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick; I am from the department of agricultural and 
food engin eering, department of IIT Kharagpur . 
((Refer Slide Time: 00:44 ) 
 
The concepts that will be covered in this lecture material are the introduction to the constructed 
wetland, constructed wetland microbial fuel cell technologies, different other forms of bio-
electrochemical  systems like microbial electrolysis cell, microbial electrosynthesis cell.  If you 
remember in the last lecture, we discussed about the microbial fuel cell ; in general , we discussed 
how the microbial fuel cell can change the wastewater trea tment region.  Because , it will not only 
change , it will not only treat the wastewater aquaculture wastewater , but also it has the capacity 
to even  you kn ow generate electricity out o f it, which is completely a bio -electricity . 
That can be utilized in in as a you know  for an y low energy up taking  device s to charge as well. 
So, here I wi ll mainly be focusing on the constructed  wetland, microbial fuel cell,  and different 
other forms of B ES. In the follow -up lecture also, I will continue with this lecture and co ntinue with this  bio-electrochemical  systems , where I will discuss about microbial desalination cell , 
sediment, microbial  fuel cell et -cetera et -cetera. I hope you will be benefited wi th these new 
technologies  that I a m discussing here, w hich can be used i n aquaculture se ctor as well.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:58)  
 
Cons tructed wetlands, you know  it is an engineered system inspired by the natural wetland . It 
has microbes , plants and physical environment like sun , soil, and air interaction is help  is utilized 
to improve the water qualit y. So , it is like mimicking the natural wetland ecosystem; and we call 
we call that i s why we call them constructed wetland. You understand why it is named 
constructed wetland? So, this constructed wetland what we a re doing ? We a re pumping the 
wastewater . We a re pumping the wastewater to suppose a particular type of species , and a 
particular type of wetland in a wetland with the crops.  
This crops what they are doing?  They will consume the waste material; I mean  the pollutant  
present  in the waste ; I mean lik e the wastewater , they will consume it for their  you know  to 
convert it to the biomass , because they are beneficial to them. Suppose in your wastewater , you 
have nitrogen or a high amount of nitrate;  the nitrate can be beneficial f or the crop for those 
wetland  plant. So , they will consume them and they will make them in their biomass ; they will 
convert it to the bio in to their biomass like you know. Because of t his changes, what is 
happening? T he wa ter pollutant level goes down; it is as simple as that.  So, then the  water which is coming out of t his wetland is kind of pollutant free. The removal 
efficiency can vary.  But, the remove the most of the cases , the organic or nit rogenous or say like 
any other pollutant level is witnessed by  different investigators to be dra stically lower ed than its 
source  like you know ; then it i s a point of application. In this particular picture, if you see in this 
figure in this system, they have like you know  two phase wetland systems . In the one phase , they 
treat it; they are collecting in a particular storm . Then, again they pump it, they treat it and they 
collect it  in a particular pump ; and then the y receiving water body is there  like you know  , which 
the first stage first wetland is kind of (consi) y ou know.  
It acts  like primary sludge treatment in a unit, integrated wit h the free treatment of the 
wastewater. The next one is  the kind of a post treatment , nitrification , and the disinfection unit . 
Then, outlet shaft , and then  the outflow , where the reci pient or say  like surface water body , or 
groundwater , also  infiltration  to the agricultural landscape  irrigation systems. So, in general , how 
it looks like , you I think you have understood; it i s very simple.  But, it is very effective 
wastewater treatment system . And it is used for in different sectors, in if if you remember we 
will discuss , we discussed  about the wastewater  aquaculture; I wi ll discuss more abou t in details 
in later lectures, like what is what was waste water  feed aquaculture.  
So, there we w e use these kinds of systems. So, this not only in aquaculture what is the 
additiona l thing with  this? This  instead of this only wetland, we can introduce in between we can 
introduce the pond as well. In between,  in in between if we introduce a pond ; that pond  can also 
be used to reduce the load of the wastew ater. What type of wastewater I am discussing here ? Say 
like municipality wastewater  okay . In case of m unicipality wastewater and all , there is less 
chance of having heavy metals ; and I mean  nowadays it  is, but earlier it was no t. There is a more 
of a it i s mainly constitutes of the gr eywat er, which does have the organic substances mainly , 
majorly ; and some other surfactants and all . 
These organic substances and all that can be reduced , that can be utili zed by the wetland , by 
those wastewater fed aquaculture. A nd then they reduce the pollut ant load of the water ; and then 
that water can be easily supplied to the receiving water bodies,  anyway. So t hat is a different 
discussion; s o in general, that is how  the constructed wetland works.  (Refer Slide Time: 06:04)  
 
So, what is the why construct ed wetland , why we should go ahead? Why , what is the benefit of 
this kind of technology? First, no electricity , no chemical is required, no sludge problem, no 
missionar ies involved , very low -cost constr uction with the local material; this  like you know  
inbound natu ral material, very low operation and the maintenance cost. It is i t is suitable for 
variable flow , shock flow like in a very remote location; and it is  really green and like gardening  
okay . What are the limitations ? It needs some large land area , and relatively  slow process , and 
moderate treatment performance is witnessed . 
Other than this three , in most of the cases this constructed wetland  has very high accepta nce 
range in  wastewater treatment regimes.  (Refer Slide Time: 06:53)  
 
Now, so what is my constructed  wetland  microbial fuel cell ? Microbial fuel cell, w e discussed in 
last presentation last lecture  right , it is very important ; try to understand , you try to remember . In 
microbial fuel cell  we have anaerobic chamber, which is anodic  chamber; a erobic chamber, 
which is the cathodic chamber. What is happening in the anodic  anaerobic chamber ? The 
anaerobes,  exoelectrogens , a specific type of microorganisms , which can grow there in the over 
the anodic surface.  
They consume the pollutant  from the wastewater and they co nvert it to different different ions 
like electrons and protons  say. These electrons are moving through the external circuit ; and the 
protons are mo ving through the proton exchange membrane ; and it will come to the cathodic 
chamber. Once it will come to th e cathodic chamber, it will react with the terminal elec tron 
acceptor.  What  is the terminal acceptor ? very famously used Oxygen. Oxygen is , it is very much 
available  in the nature , in atmos phere.  
That oxygen is supplying this  oxygen ; react with this electr ons and the protons , which is coming 
from the other way , and then it will form H 2O. By this way, one cycle is cycle is finished ; and 
because cycle i s there, and because of this cycle, what has happened ? We can get the electric 
response from this kind of fu el cells microbial.  That is why it is called micro bial fuel cell.  The 
same if you  just simply rotate it , and if you see constru cted wetland  is somet hing like that  only; because , after a certain height, the mostly they are in constructed wetland, the  anaerob ic situation 
is prevailed . 
And and in the top , it is like  mainly the water it has this water, available water ; and it has mainly 
in contact with th e atmosphere , that place  is aerobic in nature. Why not we use it as a constructed 
as a constructed wetland mi crobial fuel cell?  That is what is being done. In that is why what is 
the future direction of this kind of constructed wetland microbial fuel cell?  So, what it  what is 
done  if I if I give you again in a very brief way. A node is placed in the bottom , in a f ar like you 
know  or like a little bit far from the surface ; and the cathode is placed on the on the surface of 
this constructed wetland.  
And then i t is conn ected through external wire; we do no t need any membrane or nothing. You 
will see the, you can see the changes in the electricity ; because I mean it is change in the  
potential  You c an see the potential difference  is there , if you put the multimet er. And that if you 
can har vest and it is a more like a school project we used to do . You have a pot like a big pot. In 
this big  pot, you have your the normal soil , you use  you have your crop in this pot. You keep on 
adding a water and nutrient solution time to time for your crop to grow. So , what you do in the 
pot? In the bottom you place . 
And the extreme bottom you place one grap hite plate , or say carbon plate , or carbon rod . And 
there at the top , you plate  one carbon rod. Y ou connect them with the titani um wire or say  a 
copper wire ; and in the middle , you put the resistance say 100 ohm,  200 ohm resistance . Time to 
time after cert ain days , you will see that there is a changes in the electr ic port and the changes in 
the (potential ); you can y ou can witness the potential difference. That means the electricity is 
getting like you know  generated  there. I f you put a small LED bulb there, you wi ll see the  LED 
bulb will lead. S o, you can try it , you can try ; this is like school days experiment that we used to 
do; so it i s more like that.  
So, if you , the why it i s happening ? Because of the anaerobicity. T here because of the the in the 
plate, t here is some ex oelectrogens  they keep on growing . And because of the water which we 
are supplying along with the nutrient tha t will help to grow them very nicely in the bottom ; and 
they will it i s like it will replicate  replicating the microbial fuel cell in general.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:51)  
 
This, what is the future options for this kind of constructed wetland microbial fuel  cell? It can be 
used to enhance the nutrient removal chemical oxygen demand , plus nitrogen removal , organic 
(refran)  refractory organic s removal,  refractory organics. What do I mean by the refractory 
organics? What is degradable? You know biodegradable an d degradable, biodegradable organics. 
What is refractory organics? Refractory organics you know  in a in a gross way , you can you can 
just; you should under stand that refractory is  maybe we can call them hardly biodegradable 
component . 
Hardly biodegradable component  because there is n ow science has progressed in,  up to  very 
highest in a very high speed ; and it has reached to that stage t hat there is nothing c alled non -
biodegradable. Now , everything is biodegrade , everything is biodegradable;  we have even fou nd 
some type of fungi which can even consume  the plastic. So nothing is non -biodegradable; s o, 
there is biodegradable , there are  hardly biodegradable. So , refractory compounds are some they 
are like this. They have this benzene  rings a nd all; because of th at, it i s very hard for them to, 
hard for the biolo gical compound to degrade them l ike dyes, pesticides  and all.  
Even this kind of waste  constructed wetlan d microbial fuel cell can be used to reduce , to remove 
these kinds of pollutants as well , which has w hich is refractory in nature. It can be used for heavy 
metal removal and heavy metal  iron recovery and removal ; And this  is these are all the users . (Refer Slide Time: 12:27)  
 
What  are the other type of bio-electrochemical  systems ? We discussed already d iscussed about 
the microbial fuel cell , which converts the chemical energy stored in organic matter into 
renewable electricity, electrical energy. Now, we  will discuss about the MEC and MES in this 
lecture; and the coming lecture I wi ll discuss about the M DC. What is MEC ? M icrobial 
Electrolysis Cell . What is what is it saying? It i s saying that it can produce hydrogen gas with the 
applied voltage as a renew able source of energy ; and it can produce the H 2O to NaOH  et-cetera.  
I will d iscuss about in  coming slide. What is MES? Microbial Electrosynthesis Cell;  it has a high 
value . You can you can recover high value chemical like ethanol,  acetate , phenazine et -cetera 
from out of nowhere . I would say  out of nowhere , because all maybe you can use the flue gases. 
Like You can simply use the carbon  dioxide; what is flu e gases  right ? In the industrial gas , 
industrial  release of gas which we can call is flue gases. T hat flue gases  if you supply it  here, it 
does contain huge amount of carbon dioxide . That carbon dioxide can be captured and utilized to  
recover high value chemicals u sing this microbial electrosynthesis cell.  
Is not it amazing, is not it something is very interesting? I will discuss about it in detail how it 
works. And another one is Microbial Desalination Cell MDC . In a desalination from the name 
itself you can understand what is what it does ? It desalinate the saline  water. So , simultaneous 
desalination energy product ion is possible from microbial desalination cell Okay . And it can be 
used as a pre-treatmen t option for reverse osmosis and other tertiary treatment. I will  discuss about it in in next lecture. So , today I wil l mainly be focusing in the coming couple of slides 
MEC and MES.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:18)  
 
To start with th e microbial electrolysis cell , if you remember a s I discussed, it is a it is also bio-
electrochemical  system. It does also have anode and cathode and all these things  okay . In the 
anode w hat is happening ? You have some inoculums, you have some you a re providing some 
inoculums; you a re providing some say plant waste or a normal waste and all. I n that from that 
waste and all , and it is connected to a power source . In that power source, y ou have to provide 
more than 0.2 volt of pot ential difference like voltage.  
Once you a re applying this  from this outside source of this particular amount of power , like this 
point more than 0.2 volt of potential difference to anode and cathode . What will happen ? In the  
cathode , in the anode there is this exoelectrogens  will be developed ; they will consume the 
acetate and all . They will consume this acetic acid and they will release the electrons , protons , 
and carbon dioxide . And this protons , which will come through the  proton exchange membrane 
towards the cathodic side , and the electrons which are being su pplied from the powe r source; 
there is no (exter nal) external terminal electron acceptor  here. What is happening ? 
The electron and this proton is they combined in the su rface of the cathode and they form H2; 
pure H2, which is used as a clean fuel that vehi cles can be used. So, microbial electrolysis  cell is 
used to generate hydrogen pure hydrogen  okay . So, this is this is not up to the  you kn ow, you cannot say like it is not as good as  hydrogen fuel cells  and all ; but, it does also people are also 
working o n it. And there is a high chance it  will also surplus with this  you know ; it will also 
surplus . It is I mean like it will somehow manage it s all the cons part of the disadvantages of it ; 
and i n the very near future, i t will also be a very reproducible syst em and cutting it . 
It is already cutting edge technology , a lot of industries are also working on it . They in maybe 
very near future , you will see it in a home to home bases like this kind of microbial electrolysis 
cell generate the hydrogen ; which will be  used for you know has a very high calorific value that 
can be used for as an  alternative to the all the non -renewable fuel sources and all  okay ; the fossil 
fuels  and all . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:44)  
 
So, what are the advantages of it? It has a very high hy drogen yield capacity almost 67 to 91 
percent age. Dark fermentation can be integrated with M ECs to convert any complex organic 
molecule into hydroge n gas. What is the disadvantage? A  huge energy lo ss; hydrogen production 
can be economically viable only whe n over potential losses are less than point 5 volt . And low 
hydrogen production rate  like you know ; in general, tha t is what I was talking that time. I n 
general , the hig hest hydrogen production rate re ported up to now is in the range of point 15 to 
point 2  liter of hydrogen per liter per hour , of at an applied voltage of point 8 volts.  
This compares unfavorably w ith the  maximum 7.9 liter of hydrogen per liter per hour in dark 
fermentation method. Anyway, if you c an make proper combination of dark fermentati on or MFC  MEC;  and if you can improvise the electrochemistry of MEC , and we really work on it. 
There are a lot of people working on it , experts working on it from all over the world. So , 
definitely we can come o ut with some solutions, which will which will  further increase the 
hydrogen yield . And in general, it will have a very high effective application in treatment of 
wastewater as well as electricity  regeneration . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:05)  
 
Microbial electros ynthesis cell is electro synthesis cell and al l; that is what we were discussing in 
last last  two slides also.  Remember that I told you that it is used to generate  you know  some very 
important byproduct , very valued byproduct I would say  okay . How  it is done? You simply have 
a potentiostat  where you a pply the external potential . In your cathode, you are supplying with the 
flue gases ; especially  you supplied with the  pure carbon dioxide if you want to increase the 
efficien cy. This carbon dioxide upon accepting the protons and accepting the electrons fro m the 
potentiostat , it will convert into much multi carbon organic compounds like ethanol, butanol et -
cetera,  which has a ve ry high potential market value.  
So, it i s like carbon dioxide is used fast ; it is used , it is conside red you kn ow, it is reducing th e 
carbon dioxide (consump).  I mean, it is reducing the carbon dioxide emission from the industry , 
when you it is used . And you kn ow from in the for industrial flue gases, i t can be used as a 
carbon dioxide utilization and in the capturing devi ce; and this capturing . And  it can also give 
you the byproduct which has a lso a very high end value and all.  Nowadays , in different places  in Europe , in India also people , a lot of people are working on this t echnology microbial 
electro synthesis cell , MES.  
Just remembe r it; it will be a ve ry futuristic technology that I a m discussing here. It i s it has the 
capacit y to convert carbon dioxide in a valuable byproducts in biofuel;  simply completely 
biofuel . And also the whole technology requires a very less amo unt of you kn ow energy   and all ; 
rather than all the other technologies available for generating the biofuels  and all okay . And it is 
also not only generating biofuels,  but also it is reducing the carbon impact  of of the system , of 
the of your industry , of your farm an d all okay . So, this is how the microbial electrosynthesis  
works . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:10)  
 
In general , it is used for , it is a very greener , cleaner , and sustainable approach of as carbon 
dioxide is used as a feedstock. And this carbon dioxide can be in troduced this a ll the industrial 
carbon dioxide that is being generated through the flue gas of the food processing industries and 
all. Or aquaculture processing industries and all that can be supplied to this kind of system, 
which can be a very handy tool  to mitigate t he global warming as well. It is a carbon negative 
technology to produce electro fuels or  the biofuels. It is self -sustainable and very low -cost 
biocatalyst can be used . 
Possible storage of excess electrical energy in C -C bond ; and does not  require arable l and to 
produc e biofuel.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:54)  
 
It has a,  it has a lot of benefits and ; but, obviously it comes with some problems as well , some 
disadvantages as well. And what are the disadvantages? S ubstantial amount of this energy whi ch 
is required  to keep the bond present in the carbon dioxide ; because you know  carbon dioxide has 
to be first the bond (dissoci) dissociation energy has to be supplied ; and then only it can form the 
other high end byproduct. The characteristi cs of the ele ctro electrophs electro trophs  are still 
alien ; means the electrotrophs  that is used that is normally generated , or they form the bio fuel 
over the anode is still alien ; and still people do not know.  
Still experts are trying to understand more and more deta ils about it. Still, th e science is , I would  
say the experts have already come up with some very important outcomes and imp ortant 
parameter identification.  But, still some work to be done to be 100 percent  sure about the exact 
characteristics and the total  fallout of the events  okay . The low yield of organic compound; o ne 
problem you know  is this ethanol’s  and all , it is not you canno t do it in a industrial scale; p eople 
have started doing it . Now, a  couple of industries in Europe , they have already started  it; 
especially , in Belgium and the in Netherlands . But, the problem is like they are still ; it is  very, 
the yield is very low  okay . 
So, and also the purity is also very important ; the purity  is also , because it comes with a different 
production and  all. So, you have to be very precise about segre gation of the product of your 
byproduct; a nd also it is very difficult to maintain aseptic  condi tion in the field in the field of  you know for pure culture. Suppose , you a re providing any pure culture , but it i s very difficult to that 
you can get rid of all the oth er microorganisms , or all the other pathogens and  all. Because  
aseptic  conditions, in general what is called like an aseptic  means ? A microbial free situation, or  
like harmful micr obial free situation in g eneral, we call aseptic condition.  
The product sepa ration through the mod ecular modular setup is very difficult ; and less 
knowledge about the electron optic mechanism. Still, we are struggling stills,  we are wor king in 
it all over the world; d ifferent lot of experts are working on it . Even in our lab in II T Kharagpu r 
also people are working on it;  how what how this electron optic uptake mechanism is working. 
How deep how from  this (elect) this electrophile, this  exoelectrogens; t he electr ons are being 
consu med by the,  like you know  these  electrons are being transferred t o anode and all . Anodic 
biofilm, through anodic  biofilm  to the anode, it is still a matter of discussion matter of, still some 
activities.  Experts are working all over the world to under stand  the mechanism in details.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:45)  
 
What are the parameters that govern the MES?  Mainly  the C oulombic efficienc y, which is the 
efficiency of the biocatalyst  to convert the Coulombs  obtained from  an electrical current to 
multi carbon organ ic compounds. So, it i s like in a  denominator , we have the Coulo mb available 
with electric current that you supplied. And in the numerator , you have the multi carbon organic 
compounds . You know  What is Coulomb  right? It is a unit of charge . So, this C oulomb s, the 
amount  of Coulomb present in electrical energy that you supplied, and th e amount of C oulomb that is  you know  required to make these to prepare  this multi carbon organic compounds ; is this 
efficiency is called the  Coulombic efficiency.  
Phylogenetic an alysis of mixed culture inoculum is very important to understand the 
phylogenetic classi fication . Means what are the microorganisms ? What are the type of  archea  
bacteria , or the virus , or fungus ; whatever it is like it is present in the culture. Electrode  potential , 
time to time to govern the electron  transfer and the thermodynamics of the whole this fu el cell. 
To selective enrichment or the pre-treatment , to increase the population of aceto genic species. If 
you remember i n last lecture, I discussed how ace togenic  aceto genic  species can be enriched ; 
because we do need  methanogenic  population to be there . 
Methanogenic  population what they do?  They  will consume and they will kind of scavenge the 
electrons from the system ; and it will reduce the overall efficie ncy. Carbon recovery efficiency : 
the  ratio of the moles of carbon present in the product to the m oles of carbon supplied in terms 
of carbon dioxide ; this is called the carbon recovery efficiency.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:28)  
 
Some of the major findings of M ES are the acetate is the main product of bio  electro synthesis. 
Alcohols  can also be produced by c reating a reducing environment in the cathodic  chamber. This 
can be done by keeping a low pH and higher partial pressure of hydrogen in the cathodic  
chamber. Use of pure culture increases the C olumbic efficiency ; and also it maintains the 
products purity . Hydrogen -mediated electron transfer  is generally preferred during the microbial electrosynthesis cell. A nd suppressing methanogens  by physical or chemical tre atment is very 
much important you know  to enhance the acetogenic  microbial quantum presence ; and they can 
enhance the overall product  yield.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:11)  
 
So, I hope you get to know this two very interesting technology , cutting -edge technolog y I would 
say, which are there in the field and people are working on it. It has a lot of futuristic applic ation 
in aqua culture ; and it will be used in very much in the aquaculture  in a very recent era . And it i s 
started  you people started already using it , especially the constructed wetland microbial fuel cell ; 
or microbial electro synthesis , electrosynthesis c ell, or microbial electrolysis cell. A nd for 
different high-value  chemical production and also hydrogen gas for biofuel production as well.  
I hope th is lecture material helps you helps you with the understanding of the  by different bio-
electrochemical  system in genera l. I hope in the coming lecture, I will be discussing more in 
details about different other microbial desalination cell and  all. And t hose will also be and also 
sediment microbial fuel cell,  which will definitely help you with more in details ; like how this 
bio-electrochemical  systems can be used as a water treatment, futuristic water treatment option 
for aquaculture practices  okay . 
I hope you understood this technology in very good manner. If you want to know more in detail s, 
you can simply google s earch it ; and you can simply see my profile as well. There also you can 
see some research paper , and review  paper , and the book chapter , which y ou can follow to get more details about it. I hope you get to know something very informative and nice informati on 
knowledge ; and I hope  it is helpful to you.  Thank  you so much ; see you  in the next lecture . 