Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 37  
Overview of Wastewater Treatment Methods  (Continued)  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the second l ecture of module 8,  technology of water treatment of 
the subject advanced aquaculture technology . My name is Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick;  
I am from the department of agriculture and food engineering of IIT Kh aragpur .  
(Refer Slide Time 00:40)  
 
 
So the  concepts that  I will  be covering in this particular lecture matter are the continuation 
from the earlier lecture where we have already discussed about the primary treatment unit . Today we will cover  in this particular lecture we will  be covering the secon dary treatment  
unit, the trickling  filter , activated sludge process , secondary settling tanks , etc and the tertiary 
treatment units and what are the effluent  quality requirement and the standard fish processing 
wastewater characteristics parameter and the treatment that  is normally been used like the 
conventional treatment technology that we normally use in fish processing unit plus 
aquaculture's wastewater treatment as well .  
So to start with if you remember correctly in last lecture we have covered till p rimary 
treatme nt unit, we already have enough idea about what is wastewater treatment units , what 
are the different type of wastewater  treatment units , unit operations and unit processes , we 
already have enough idea about what are the type of primary treat ment unit that  we normally 
have in our sewage treatment plant or municipality treatment plant or even industrial 
treatment plants . Okay!  
So let us continue with that lecture with that discussion only so now  I will be discussing you 
about the secondary treatment  units . In gen eral the effluent from the primary treatment it 
comes into the secondary treatment units for removal of dissolve and the colloidal organic 
matter which is still present in the wastewater as it receives  Okay . So this is generally 
accompli shed by biochemical deco mposition of organic matter which can be carried out 
under the aerobic or anaerobic condition .  
What do  I mean by the aero bic and anaerobic condition? A erobic means the presence of 
oxygen and anaerobic in absence of oxygen  Okay . In this kind of this biological units most of 
the secondary treatment units are like mostly we follow this biological treatment unit a 
treatment procedure so that is  why this biological unit the different beneficial bacteria or 
microorganisms to be precise if  I say because there are othe r organisms also which plays the 
major role here , so they decompose the fine organic matter and produce the clearer effluent 
Okay  that is  the overall goal of it .  
The end product of this aerobic  decomposition are mainly carbon dioxide and bacterial cell 
when it  goes for anaerobic decomposition then the final products is the final products are a 
methane , carbon dioxide , and bacterial cell . There are some other products also that it 
develops so we will discuss about it in details with time . Okay   
So in general the bacterial  cell separate ou t in secondary settling tanks will be disposed of 
after stabilizing them under an aerobic or anaerobic process in sludge digestion tank along 
with the solid settled in the primary sedimentation tanks.  This sludge is actually very , how to say like it is very we normally use as a very like like you kn ow high-end manure  or fertilizer 
for our agriculture purposes and not only that it has a lot of other purposes , a lot of other 
users as well in biogas plant also we use it sometimes . So anyway , in general the secondary 
treatment u nits are working on this phenomena of cleaning simply decomposing the fine 
organic matter and producing the clearer effluent by means of biochemical oxidation .  
(Refer Slide Tim e 04:06)  
 
 
So I will discuss with a couple of treatmen t units  couple of examples of secondary treatment  
units just to give you a brief idea about how it works  Okay . So to start with we will start with 
the trickling filter ; if you see the figure clearly t his trickling  filters nothing filter media and in 
the filter media and in the bottom there will filter support  and the feed pipe will supply the 
inlet wastewater the the wastewater influent . Okay  So the wastewater  through this in feed pipe it will come to the sprinkler units and it will go 
like sprinkling action it will come to the surface of the filter media as a spr inkling action  
Okay , because of the sprinkling action and it is continuously the sprinkler arms are actually 
rotating over this circular tanks , in general they made in circular in nature . So in this circular 
time they will keep on rotating and they will sprinkl e the wastewater  coming from the 
primary treatment units .  
This sprinkled water when it comes in contact with the filter media what will happen , in the 
filter media with time the beneficial microorganisms start grow . So they start growing on on 
its surface  and this microorganisms they keep on consuming the pollutants from the 
wastewater and like especially the the colloidal or the dissolved  organic matter they consume 
it and they convert it into their biomass . Okay  
So that is  as simple as that and then the cleared water will come out from this collecting 
outlet to the second and to the follow -up treatment units  Okay . So that is how it is don e, so 
we normally provided with the aeration also so this aeration  units are provided at the bottom 
so you can provide it with aerat ion also, and other than that  this you may be worry about 
what happened after a certain point of time when there are very th ick biofilm which starts 
growing on its filter media how to clean it . Okay   
So we just need simply backwash it there is a procedure called bac kwashing , instead of this 
outlet section will just forcefully fill it with the clean water and by means of that we  can 
backwash some of the particles . So in order to know more in details in general this trickling  
filters is normally used for complete treat ment of domestic water and as a roughing filter for 
strong industrial waste also can be treated prior to the activ ated sludge process .  
What is activated sludge process  I will come in 2-3 slides . Primary sedimentation tank is also 
provided prior to the trickling  filter so that the settleable solids in the sewage may not clog 
the filter and we already know what  is prim ary sedimentation tank  and how it works . So this 
trickling filter is followed by a secondary sedimentation tank for removal of setteable  
bioso lids produced in this filtration process .  
I told you this   biological  biofilm that it keeps on that it keeps on g rowing over the surface of 
this filter media that actually is slogged  off, what is logged off , actually what 
happened with the time this organic material in the sewage it will keep on 
accumulating as a bacterial slide , it will convert into the bacterial sl ime where they 
partly degraded by the biota and increases the thickness of the biofilm with time. Here ia Eventually what will happen this biofilm  will get slogge d off and it because of this 
sloughing  action and the fresh biofilm  begins to grow in the medi a this phenomenon 
of detachment of biofilm is called the sloughing  off sloughing of the  filter  . This 
sloughing  phenomena is actually very much beneficial because what happened , 
becaus e of the sloughing  phenomena you can get the solid biomass which will co me 
into the secondary sedimentation tank now from  secondary sedimentation if you 
provide them enough detention time that will settle down , and the supernatant  if you 
collect  it it will be  clear wastewater clear like effluent . Okay  
This clear effluent it st ill considers different kind of different pollutants it is always better to 
check you know  with all the water  parameters and to check like whether it is completely void 
of any pollutants or not Okay  and th en based on that you can go ahead  with the tertiary  
treatment process and in general this trickling filter media they are normally of consisting of 
a rocks of 42 hundred millimeter size or the plastic media and because of this plastic media or 
these rocks this biological slimes are keep on formulating as w e already discussed and that is 
the reason why this biofilms are keep on formulating after certain moment of time it will just 
simply scour  up the from the surface of this media  and fresh biofilm  starts to  grow and this 
process is called the sloughing  of of the reactor filter medium .  
(Refer Slide Time 09:06)  
  
So we have a very basic idea at least some overall understanding about the trickling filter 
how it works , how any  that is the first setting secondary trea tment unit that we have learned 
that it is a biological process and the biofilm  it actually keeps on growing and this biological 
living beings they consume the wastewater and they purify the wastewater in the meantime . 
Same phenomena happen in case of acti vated sludge process , ASP or activated slud ge 
process is a very famous one .  
I think most of you have seen or if you go to any municipality treatment system and all most 
of the major municipality treatment systems and industrial treatment systems they use this 
activated sludge  process it is like it is very famous  Okay . So this activated sludge process 
what it happens you supply with the wastewater if you see the figure we supply with the 
wastewater there is  this biological reaction tank or  reactor aeration  tank or sometimes we 
normally call it the a eration tank .  
In the aeration tank what we are doing we are supplying it with the enough amount of 
dissolved oxygen  or dissloved air , because of the presence of high ample amount of oxygen 
there is a chances of growing of huge amount of aerobic microorgan isms, beneficial 
microorganisms . What they will do , they will consume the waste  pollutants from the 
wastewater and they are in suspended in nature , see in case of trickling filter that is  a attached 
growth process .  
There is two type of biofilm we can get one in attached growth condition , one in suspended 
condition  Okay . So in case of activated sludge process generally the biofilm  or the microbiota 
that the beneficial  micro biota  that grows inside this aerobic chamber is suspended in nature , 
they normally i t stays in suspension  Okay . However , in case of trickling filter it was attached growth biofilm,  they attached to a surface and then they start growing normally but in case of 
activated sludge process they are in suspended in nature .  
So they will kee p on suspending on this aerobic basin and they will consume the nutrient and 
they will utilize it for their biomass production like they will convert it into their healthy 
biomass and by means of that the pollutant load can be minimized and then it will go  to the 
secondary clarifier or settling tank , what happened to the settling tank almost it also has the 
almost same procedure or the as you remember in case of primary sedimentation tank  also, in 
case of secondary sedimentation tank also it what happened that a ll the settleable solid get 
settled and that can be utilized for  the sludge production  and all , sludge utilization  and all  
Okay .  
In general you remember this part of the organic matter that you are supplying to your 
aerobic basin is synthesized into new c ell Okay  and part is oxidized and they convert it to the 
follow -up products or they convert it to some other gaseous compound  and all  Okay .  
The biomass generated in the eration  basin is generally flocculent and separated from the 
aerated  wastewater in the  secondary sedimentation tank and then recycle partially to the 
aeration tank . Why the why  we need to recycle it back , you might have been confused , now it 
is converted to biomass now it is going to secondary  clarify , now we just throw it , why to put 
it back into the activated sludge process again there is a r eason behind it .  
I would really request you to know some of the important parameter of water quality , so 
where we discussed about if we remember the solid analysis , different kind of solids like 
suspe nded solids , volatile suspended solid , dissolve d suspen ded solids , this volatile 
suspended solid it is a major concern and volatile suspended solid  actually shows us the 
amount of biomass present in your system . So if you can somehow calculate the VSS of your 
system or in this particular case we call it mixed liquor volatile suspended solid MLVSS, 
MLVSS  if you want to know more in details just google it and try to understand like what is 
MLVSS.   
I’m just d ue to the time constant  I can only tell you MLVSS  is a kinda give you like you 
know  indication of amount of biofilm  or amount of biomass pre sent in your system  Okay . So 
this MLVSS   has to be in a certain range all the time , you cannot just simply throw it away 
and at one point of because see wastewater is k eep on coming to your system ; if you throw 
certain amount of wastewater and and along with tha t all the biomass is getting thrown away , 
what will happen that your aeration  basin will have very low MLVSS  that means very low biomass at that particular moment  of time . So the treatment will be not sufficient , you have to 
maintain a certain amount of b iomass all the time in your aeration basin , in your activated 
sludge process that is mandatory , because so that amount of microorganisms can keep on 
work on your w astewater load that will work on it and then the excess amount of biomass 
that is getting gen erated that can be thrown away  Okay .  
So this is some some important factors that  I am discussing with you really should remember 
those things , if you have any iss ues any doubt  I will be coming for a live session and soon 
and then there also you can ask or mayb e you can simply google it  Okay . So this aeration 
process  this is how it works and this activated sludge  process majorly we try to keep the 
detention period o f 6 to 8 hour. If you remember the detention period like the amount of time 
for which the liquid stays in the reactor it should be 6 to 8 hours that means within 6 to 8 
hours it is sufficient for your inlet load like the wastewater load to be minimized to a certain 
limit  Okay . Based on the volume of aeration tank , the volume of aeration tank  is normally we 
decid ed based on the return sludge because it is normally we put it like 25 to 50 percent of 
wastewater volume is again get back to the aeration  basin .  
The liquid depth it should be provided 3 to 4.5  meter , a freeboard of 0.3 to 0.6  meter . The 
mode of air supp ly either diffused air or by supplementing compressed air from the tank 
bottom or by mechanical aerator provided at the surface  Okay . The modificati on of the 
activated sludge process also known as extended aeration  is also popularly used in treatment 
of wastewa ter. In case of external duration it is designed at very high hydraulic  retention time 
18 hour with a very low F by M  ratio Okay .  
It may go as  low as 0.05 to 0.15 kg of COD  per kg of VSS per day . I hope that you can 
google it or you can  like or maybe  I can give you  a very basic funda  about how , what is F by 
M ratio. From the name itself you can understand F is food or feed and M is microorganism s, 
so this is a food to microorganism ratio . How to understand the food , what is the food for 
microorganisms , organic matte r, how to quantify organic matter COD  or BOD?  So this food 
is represented by COD  microorganisms , how to quantify microorganisms if yo u remember  I 
just said VSS,  volatile suspended solid so VSS is representative of your amount of 
microorganisms .  
So what is  food to microorganisms’  ratio amount of food that is supplied and amount of 
microorganisms  that is present in your system , this rati o is like food to microorganism ratio . 
Okay  So there are different terms of it there are different conditions of it and the prop er definition and all that  I can discuss in details , but due to time constraint  I cannot  I would 
really suggest suggest you to g o and google it and get learn more about it .  
(Refer Slide Time 17:24)  
 
  
Now there comes the secondary treatment unit , so we  only discussed about trickling filter and 
activated sludge process . These both are aerobic process  I only choose this to give y ou a 
better understanding of it and with a minimal amount of excess knowledge about more in 
detail .  
So there are other type of treatment units as well USB  outflow search blanket reactor , we 
have different kind of other oxidation ponds is also there , so there are  a lot of MBR  is there 
membrane by reactor , moving bed biofilm reactor is there so there are different type of 
secondary trea tment units that  I am not discussing in details right now because of time 
constraint  and our motto is not to learn treatment  units but to more in the advanced 
aquaculture practices , but it comes with this knowledge is necessary to understand how we 
can tre at your aquaculture wastewater . Okay   
So next we will discuss about the secondary treatment units , majorly the design of sec ondary 
treatment settling is somehow different than that of a primary settling tank  Okay . In case of 
secondary treatment unit or secondary set tling tank the function served as clarification as well 
as thickening of the sludge . So our work not only is clari fication or the sedimentation but also 
the thickening of the sludge . The more  thicker the sludge and you can be collected in a very 
precise ma nner and it can be used for different other purposes and the type of settling that it 
takes in case of secondary settling  tank is referred to as zone settling followed by 
compression . Okay  
In case in SST the detention period is around 1.5 to 2.5 hour , what does that m ean that the 
water will stay there for 1.5 to 2.5 hour , so it will facilitate enough time for sediment ation of the all your like biomass which is coming from the activated sludge process or UASB or 
trickling  filter or MBR  or MBBR , etc.  
The depth of the tank can b e between 2.5 to 4.5 meter , the area of the tank is to be walked out 
on the basis of surface o verflow rate , the overflow rate for SST this secondary settling tank of 
tracking filter should be 15 to 25 meter cube per meter square per day , what does that mea n, 
what is surface overflow rate ? It means the amount of wastewater which is coming in per 
square meter of available surface area of your treatment unit per day Okay  and SST for 
activated sludge process is 15 to 35 meter cube  per meter square per day at average  growth  
Okay .  
Length of the effluent wier should be such that the wier loading rate shou ld be always less 
than 185 meter cube per meter per day otherwise what will happen it may make certain 
turbulence  into the system and because of that there is the chance  of some sludge loss through 
your effluent wier.  
So that is all about the secondary tr eatment  Okay , its not all  I am again saying this is just to 
give you a very brief introduction of these things  Okay  just to know about secondary 
treatment unit it will take like 10 h ours of lecture at least to give you some basic 
understanding but as  I already mentioned so this is just to give you some overall idea about 
the systems and the kinetics that is used and later on  will with time we will  go we will  know 
more in detail and if you are interested you can simply google it and find out the details of t he 
whatever the knowledge you want to hear  and gain additionally to th is.  
Third treatment unit is the tertiary treatment unit , what is a tertiary treatment unit ? This 
treatment is sometimes called as the final or the  advanced treatment unit . It consists o f 
majorly the removing the organic matter left after the secondary treatment , removal of 
nutrients from the sewage and particularly killing the pathogenic bacteria  Okay .  
Now after these things are done the sludge that is coming out of this system , the slu dge 
drying beds are commonly used for treating this sludge which is coming out from primary 
sedimentation tank or secondary sedimentation tank or tertiary units it can be treated and it 
can be well disposed for different o ther purposes  Okay .  
So what are t he different type of tertiary treatment units that is available you can use the 
flocculation , chlorine disinfection , tertiary filters , storage pond all these things are examples 
of different tertiary treatment units . What happe ns in tertiary treatment unit s? Ssuppose there are some amount of solids still somehow feed away from your secondary treatment unit then 
that solid has to be taken care of  right  it has to be trapped in the system in the treatment unit 
that is to be done in tertiary treatment unit .  
If some amount of pathogens are still available pathogenic microorganisms just to make sure 
that there is no pathogenic microorganisms , because it may be used for some anthropogenic 
activity maybe like you know  if it is directly exposed to the hum an being  and all, what will 
happen in that case if there is pathogenic bacteria are present there it will cause a different 
type of diseases that is  why we use different kind of disinfecting units , UV units , ozonation 
unit, chlorine disinfection , these are the dif ferent examples  I am just giving you these 
examples just to give you a broad idea about how tertiary treatment unit works and why it is 
provided .  
Storage ponds  are given , as you know sun is the best disinfectant you put it in the sunlight for 
the water in  a very shallow storage ponds for long  amount  for long  period of time it will treat 
the water by themselves  only like atleast some , at least up to a certain extent  Okay . It is not 
that you will provide it with xenob iotic very high end chemical compounds  and a ll and it will 
treated,  no it has to be treated separately with the proper procedure or scientific way .  
(Refer Slide Time 23:28)  
  
So in general the effluent quality requirement for disposal or treated effluent into the water 
body or say like you want t o reuse for irrigation the effluent  standard has to be main tained , 
effluent standard has to be maintained means the water quality of the effluent has to be 
properly managed , properly maintained and it has to be well within the limits of limit  given 
by the regulatory body .  
In Indian context central pollution control board are the regulatory bodies they  are the  this is 
the regulatory body in I ndian context , so they say  like okay yo ur from this industry so the 
water that you are disposing from your treatment unit after the industrial purpose is done that 
has to be well within this limit . The BOD  should be this , COD  should be this , pH should be 
this, TSS should be this, the total suspended solid , VSS should be this , and dissolve  oxygen 
should be this . I mean I am just giving you overall example the nitrogen content , nitrite , 
nitrate , ammonia , phospho rus, chlorine , arsenic and all these things like everything is well 
prescribed it is given all the details are given in the CPCB  website also that you can follow .  
So you have to know that these are the limit above of which you may get some legal action , 
there is a chance of legal actions taken against you if you are not following those regulatory 
bodies the rules and regulations given by the regulatory bodies  and if you do not maintain 
that effluent standard given by the central pollution control board in Indian context  Okay , but 
there are other regulated bodies as well state state based or private best so that also can be 
there should be maintained ; it is completely based on th e place to place  Okay .  
So after all this let us  now discuss about as  I mentioned at the very beg inning of this model 
we are discussing a whole treatment system at the beginning , wastewater  treatment systems 
with time will narrow it down to aqua culture or fish processing industries  Okay . In case of fish processing industry or fish processing  like like you know  different proc essing wastewater 
that it comes out from fish crossing industries in general what are the characteristic s of this 
wastewater . It has a pH  of around 5.7 to 7.4 , solid content TS can be 2000 to 3000 milligram 
per liter total suspended solids around 10 to 30 percent of TS among the 40 percent organic 
volatile solid mainly consists of trimethylamine and volatile fatty acid , because  these are the 
excretory products from the fish industries in general .  
The biochemical oxygen demand BOD 5 will be like 500 to 15 00 it is really high and 40 
percent of like chemical oxygen demand which is like different chemicals are 1300 , 1500  up 
to three  thousand , five thousand , ten thousand also you can go sometimes depending upon the 
type of wastewater , type of industry that you ar e working on . This is highly notorious you 
cannot just use it , you cannot just throw it into the surface water body it will just completely 
disrupt the whole ecosystem of your river or your surface water whether it be pond or lake 
whatever it is .  
You have  to treat the water  the wastewater in a proper manner so that final effluent which is 
coming out of your treatment plant has  to be well added to the regulations given by the 
regulatory body like CPCB  and all  Okay . Fat, oil and grease  concentration can be as high as 
550 milligram  per litre,  it is pretty , high total ammonium nitrogen 600 to 3000 milligram per 
liter, free ammonia 50 to 600  milligram per liter and we are talking about in 1 to 10.  
Free ammonium nitrogen even like 1 to 10  milligram per liter can be lethal ; it is really lethal 
for the aquatic species . You have to understand this fact , so you know it free ammonium 
nitrogen is very notorious for any aquatic species  Okay . So it has to be minimize , how to do 
that proper treatment  Okay  unit proper treatment unit  or proper treatment de sign of your 
wastewater  treatment units .  (Refer Slide Time 28:00)  
 
 
  
There are some  existing wastewater  treatment technologies that is used in fish processing 
wastewater like activated sludge process , rotating biological contractor , trickling filter , 
upflow  anaerobics sludge  blanket reactor , so this upflow  anerobic sludge banket is the 
anaerobic wastewater treatment units .  
So all these statement units are used in fish processing industry and it is studied by different 
reviewers , different scientists  and they found out that the organic removal of around 90 to 95 
percent can be achieved in  aerobic activated sludge process . Detention time of 1 to 2 days, F 
by M  ratio 0.1 to 0.3 , HRT  like hydraulic retention time or detention time is the same 48 hour 
in case of biological order , rotating biological contactor or RBC  with the TSS of around 290 
milligram per liter .  
So all these values are given , this removal efficiencies are given so these are the standard 
existing waste water  treatment technology that we norma lly follow however , there are some 
advantages as we discuss only about the advantages t here are lot of disadvantages also with 
this existing conventional wastewater treatment technology .  
First of all it takes a lot of land mass , it has a very high footpri nt; footprint means land 
footprint is very high it needs a huge amount of land and it is a huge amount of energy , most 
of them it cannot give you 100  percent  guarantee that the water that is coming out of the 
system is like foolproof  and you can use it at the time itself . So it may require some 
additional tertiary treatment units and all and  all these things are there , so that is  why we need 
to find out some alternate solutions  Okay , still scientists are working on it .  In next lecture  I will be discussing with you one of this technology which is considered as 
cutting edge technology for wast ewater treatment plus this technology can give us some 
bioenergy generation as well  Okay . So in next lecture  I will  be discussing more in details 
about all this about all the trea tment units .  
In general in conclusion  I can say this secondary treatment uni t where bacteria normally 
decompose the final running matter to produce clearer effluent and the end product if it is the 
aerobic process it  is carbon dioxide and bacterial cell and if it is anaerobic process mostly it is 
methane carbon dioxide and the bac terial cell . The secondary This bacterial cells which is 
separated out like which is normally generated in biological reactor it comes to the secondary 
settling tank and then there it will dispose after s tabilizing the monitor and aerobic anaerobic 
process  in a sludge digestion  tank along with the solid settled in the primary sedimentation 
tanks  and all Okay .  
So what is the takeaway message that the affluent from the primary treatment is treated 
further for the removal of dissolved  and organic colloidal or ganic matter in secondary 
treatment and this is generally accomplished through the biochemical decomposition of 
organic matter which can be carried out under either aerobic or anaerobic condition  or by 
mixture of both; there are ce rtain effluents where the y use aerobic as well as anaerobic 
treatment units . Existing technologies for fish processing wastewater treatment are ASP, 
UASB, trcikling  filter , etc Okay .  
So we will  know more about some advanced technology , advanced wastewater trea tment  
technology in the coming lecture  Okay . So these are the references that you can follow for 
further knowledge . Thank you so much see you in the next lecture .  