Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 30  
Feed Additives, Food Conversion Ratio (FCR).  
Welcome you all,  in the last lecture material o f the module six aquafeed  technology. My 
name is Professor G ourav Dhar Bhowmick  I am from the agricultural food engineering 
department of IIT, Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:35)  
 
So in this particular lecture, the concepts that we will  be covering are t he continuation of the 
feed additives, enzymes and the mycotoxin binders . We will  discuss about the feed 
conversion ratio , protein retention ratio , and the calorie retention ratio and what are these 
units  and how we can it can quantify a nd qualify the  feed availability of feed and the 
availability of the nutrient present in your fish or  in your aquatic species.  
So, we will  start with the feed additives  we already discussed about four different types of 
feed additives in the earlier lectu re. So in this  lecture, we will  discuss about the rest of the 
enzymes and mycotoxin binder.  (Refer Slide Time: 1:17)  
 
First, the enzymes as a feed  additive, in general, we supply different exogenous enzymes, 
which is used as a feed additive s, it uses t o increase the ani mal performance in terms of their, 
cause the food convert and feed conversion  and all it can reduce the negative effects of the 
anti-nutritional  factors and it also it can improve the digestion of the different dietary 
components . 
I will  discuss about all these things with different examples in coming slides and slides as 
well. So, first of all, say I am  giving you some  example of the most commonly used enzymes 
phytase, protease and alpha amylase.  So, these are some of the most used enzyme s in 
aquafeed  why we supply this okay? We will  discuss it about it.  
Mostly around 80  percent  of the phosphorus present in the plant seed is available in the form 
of phytate.  The availability and the digestibility of phytate  phosphorus are very low for fish. 
This phytate  also forms chelates  with mineral cations  like calcium, potassium, magnesium, 
ferrous , calcium, zinc and copper and complexes with the proteins and amino acids thus 
reducing the digestibility of the protein and bioavailability of other miner als. So, what to d o 
with this phytate?  
In order to reduce it in order to properly digest this phytate  for you know to increase the 
phosphorus intake and also to minimize this harmful effect if it's it will be as it is in your 
feed, we supply  it with different enzymes just because of the enzymatic activity this phytate  
is reduced and because it is , it can be used for increased phosphorus availability for your microorganisms plus it will help you to get rid of formation of these different chela tes with 
different mineral catio ns and all. S o, you understand right.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:14)   
 
So, phytase supplied at 500 units per gram per kg of feed facilit ates the better weight gain and 
it improved the apparent net protein utilization and also it increase the energy retention va lue 
of the pangasius pangasius  fingerlings. So, this is just to give you an example of how this 
different enzymes are actually helping in different other aspects as we ll as.  
Phytase, it is observed to elevate the whole body content of minerals like phospho rus, 
calcium , ferrous, zinc, copper, cobalt, etc, w hen supplemented at a level more than 250 unit 
per kg. Feed  which is supplemented with this microbial phytase. I t also demonstrated better 
growth, mineral deposition, protei n efficiency ratio and feed conv ersion ratio in juvenile Nile 
tilapia and all. 
So, these are all the examples you see like why the presence of these enzymes can be helpful. 
Whereas initially this phytate  which is generally presents  in this plant s eeds and all we are not 
with, the animal cannot able to utilize it properly , though if  the presence of phosphorus is 
there , they can be a nuisance for them in general in their body.  
But presence of this addition of this enzymatic formulas , additional enzymes can help in 
reducing the help in incre asing the performance in different aspects. Enzymes like alpha 
amylase  have been reported  to improve the starch digestibility in the juvenile silver perch.  The protease  supplementation in coextruded cano la pea based diet, it improved the apparent 
digestibi lity of the crude protein, lipid and energy and dry matter increased energy high 
energy production and also the dry matter along with increased feed efficiency in rainbow 
trout. So, these are some of the  examples we have the scientists have observed when y ou 
supply your aquatic species with the enzyme supplement and  all. 
(Refer Slide Time: 5:18)  
 
Non starch polysaccharide or NSP in short , digesting enzymes are supplied as feed additives 
as aquatic organ isms cannot produce such enzymes new naturally. So, t his non starch 
polysaccharides are very helpful and but when you get it is there in the feed but if you do  not 
supply it with the proper digesting enzymes it cannot be these enzymes  because it is not 
produced naturally they cannot digest this non starch  NSP and all.  
NSP enzymes  like pure man nanase  and the commercial enzyme mix of cellulose, protease ,  
glucan ase, and the pe ctinase have been reported to improve the dry matter and the energy 
digestibility co efficient of palm kernel meal in red hybrid tilapia . So you get the point well . 
These are all the examples I am always giving you examples of different cases where the 
production capacity is increased by means of by some means, like maybe from improved 
growth microorganisms content , improved proper digestion  of the different compo unds  and 
all. So, enzymes can help in different aspects when it given in it very specific amount in 
along with your feed and all.  
Supplementation of the this NSP degrading enzymes like cellulose , glucanase , and this 
pentosanase  on th e basal  feed of this lateolabrax japonicas , it significantly improves  the feed efficiency ratio, specific growth rate and the nitrogen retention and also it can reduce the 
ammonia excretion  and all. It is a very important thing, see, if we can reduce the a mmonia 
excretion, what will happen it will reduce the pollutant load of the dwelling water body right.  
If it is reducing the pollutant load of dwelling  water body , it will reduce the freshwate r 
exchang e, it will reduce the requirement of re-circulatory  aquaculture s ystems. So, it will not 
reduce it can at least reduce the load , in general,  overall load . So, by means of because you  
can understand right like by all this means enzymes are very much helpful depending like the 
beneficial enzymes that you  are su pplying.  
It can  be very much helpful for your rearing species for survival and the re it is for your own 
farm  growth and yield as  well.  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:43)   
 
The last feed additi ves that I will  be discussing today it  is called a mycotoxin binder . 
Mycotoxins are act ually the secondary metabolites produced from various fungi. They can 
reduce the growth and health of aquatic species consuming , aquatic species consuming the 
infected f eed. What do you understand from this what is mycotoxins ? Mycotoxins ar e the 
metabolites  secondary metabolites, we can harvest or we can we can get it from the various 
fungi s and fungi types and all.  
How it is helpful, it can reduce the growth and health o f aquatic species consuming the 
infected feed. What does that mean ? the incorporation of this kind of mycotoxin binding 
agents or the ad sorbents in  feed additives it facilitates the reduction in the mycotoxin uptake 
and their distribution in blood and targ et organisms. Not only that the materials like aluminium silicates , clay, and zeolites ar e the most commonly used mycotoxin binders  and 
all. 
So, when you supply it with this anchor brush different micro toxin binders and all what it 
will do it wil l it can increase the one you  supplied with this mycotoxin binder  and all that w ill 
reduce the uptake of my cotoxins in the cellular body in the cellular organisms and by means 
of that it can help the health surviving this aquatic species  and all .  
So, beca use with help them to even they infected in , when they consume the infected feed  
still they can survive. So, sometim es we supply this alumin ium silicate  this kind of binders 
this like aluminium silicate , clay, and zeolite along with the feed, so that it wi ll act as a 
mycotoxin  binder . So, this mycotoxin  are not being this cannot be as  harmful as it is , in the 
absence of  mycotoxin  binders. These are incorporated in  the aquafeed at levels ranging from 
1 to 10 gram per kg based on the type of product used and all. 
(Refer Slide Time: 9:58)  
 
Critical parameters which are  normally has to b e considered when we will  be choosin g the 
application of this adsorbent , adsorbent include the efficacy, specificity, mechanism of the 
action, stability of th e sorbent and the efficiency effectivity  at a broader pH level. What is 
that mean ? What are these different criterias  mean?  You get th e point . 
Mycotoxins are some harmful secondary metabolites coming out of fungi . If they  are present 
in your system, it i s harmful, what myco toxin binders are doing this different adsorbents they 
are adsorbent you know th e difference between adsorbent and a bsorbent right? This is the 
adsorbent criteria that I  am talking about. In case of adsorbent this different mycotoxins binder  they actually because of the ir specific ionic present ionic level at its at its wall or at its  
membrane or I mean like this, their surface , different surface ionic charge, this mycotoxin s 
are getting attached to its surface . 
In general, how it works in like you know chemical in chemical ly if I speak . So, then they 
attach to the surface of this adso rbent because of that, we can get we can reduce the presence 
even the infected fee d even the feed is infected, still that can be utilized for your productio n 
for your supplement as a feed and all.  So, it can reduce the overall load. 
How the efficacy is imp ortant ? Because, how much effective that a dsorbent is if you  are 
supplying your adsorbent in a big chunk, it will have a less surface area . So, their  adsorb ent 
will be minimal, how to increase it provided in a chunk in a very small chunks or small as 
micro  particle  or nano  particle. So,  what will happen because of that, it will have higher 
surface area right?  
If you have like same amount of say I want  like b ig chunk like a three centimeter big sphere, 
and the same way same metal up like you know, piece int o like you know thousands  of pieces 
with a very small diameter spheres, in which case the specific area will be high er, specific 
surface area, in the case o f small chunks, right.  
So, when the specific surface area is higher in case of small chunks, so, it  can a dsorb more 
amount of myco toxins, you understand the point so,  if it can a dsorb more amount of 
mycotoxin in its body in its surface area. So it can it is more effective. So, that  is how the 
efficacy is coming into the place.  
Specificity you have to u nderstand that where  you are uti lizing it  is likes more like, 
sometimes some drugs are to be delivered at a particular location of our body the drug ha s to 
be has to have this capacity that it will act on that specific organ or on that specific place only 
of your body it will not act in other spaces other region this is called a specificity and all 
these things . In one way it is called specificity becaus e it will go and it will act on that 
particular organ or a particular place only, that you have to make s ure.  
Mechanisms of the  action i t can be chemisorption it can be physisorption . Physisorption the 
one that I was talking about on its surface , chemisor ption are also possible when there are 
like you know, they are chemically bonded with another each other . Chemisorption are more 
neat, why I say neat because chemisorption are like kind of their s till, its adsorption process. So there is a possibility of r eversing the process as well. But it is much more well bounded 
than the physisorption  in general, I a m talking about . 
Stability of the so rbent toxin bond to prevent the des orption  of the toxin. So, this is the 
stability of the sorbent toxin bond. If I talk  about chemically, it  is nothing but suppose your 
sorbent or absorbent has a negative , say like an  anioni c charge present in its surface an d the 
toxin which is a myco toxin has a cationic  charge present on its surface. So they will 
definitely bind with each other.  
Now, it will depend whether they will bound to each other , we using hydrogen bond using 
like you  know the covalent bond or differe nt covalent bond or not because it is possible I  am 
sorry like covalent bond it  is not possible like in general electrovalen cy is possible, but this 
electrovalent  only how deeply they are bonded to each other. Based on tha t this stability is 
performed , stability is actually calculated.  
If it is like very loosely bounded. I can discuss about in in details but be cause of the time we 
cannot go ahead much but I  am just giving you overall expression how it works.  If it is 
loose ly bound, then if you supply it wit h a very basic if there is a presence of any 
antidesorption and all, it will again detach to each other.  
So, if it is like bind with each other very firmly , very strongly what will happen? this, even if 
the presence of s ome desorption, desorption  agent, i t will not be easily detached from each 
other, this is beneficial for us. So, that  is why the stability of the sorbent  toxin bond is very 
important.  
The fifth point is the effectivity  at a broader pH level is definitely important because we will  
be supply ing it to your system when along with the fee d during the production process , 
during the application proces s, the pH can be vary drastically up and down. Your  adsorbent 
has to have the capacity to retain its a dsorption ca pacity at this broader pH level. This is very 
important , zeolite and all that is  the major concern about different application of zeolite. 
Anyway, so you  will know more in details in later stage when you wi ll be doing experiments 
on it or maybe you will wo rk on it  in future.  
A bentonite base d binder applied  at like 1.5 gram per kg of feed was used to adsorb aflatoxin  
present at levels of 500 mi crogram per kg in pangasius catfish model demonstrating good fish 
performance and disease resista nce. I have alrea dy told you, I am  always , it is alway s better 
to give you one example of how it works.  So, here is one example that I have given like, how it  works for this particular type of 
pangasius catfish , this pangasius catfish they use we use this bentonite based binder at 
particular concentration li ke 1.5 gram per kg and it helps we saw that it helps in adsorbing 
aflatoxin  at the level of 500 microgram  per kg to almost zero , that means they are  very good 
adsorbent. So, because of that, the fish performance is incr eased and disease  resistance can be 
attained. These are all the discussions that we have on feed additives and all.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:17 )  
 
Now to like kind of conclude this module, we will  discuss about couple of ratios , a couple of 
number system lik e this units that we use to quantify t he applicability of the feed and efficacy 
of the feed and efficacy of the feeding strategy. So the first  one is the food feed conversion 
ratio or FCR  in detail, we ha ve already discussed about it in earlier lectures al so, in short, but 
now I will be discus sing in general how it works.  
So, the conventional measures of livestock production efficiency is typic ally given by feed 
conversion ratio. It  is a good indication of the efficiency of the feed, which you are supplyin g 
plus the strategy, the feeding strat egy that you have an a pplicant that they have applied.  
What do I mean by feeding strategy, it can be bro adcasting method just simply take the feed 
and you know throw it, it can be a specific region based method like yo u have you know, that 
this is the shad ow regions where normally your aquatic  species will dwell and you have your 
feeder set on it on your you  alread y set the feeder on that region  so, fish will come and have 
the feed . Depending upon the upstream and downs tream regions depending upon this raceway tank  at 
particular place you will put the feed where fish normally try to come and have it. So, this is a 
different  feeding strategy just to give you a gross  idea about what do I mean by the feeding 
strategy and th e efficiency of the feed . 
Feed conversi on ratio though it i s actually the weight of the feed intake divided by weight 
gained by th e aquatic species . From the ratio itself, can you tell me is it possible to have the 
FCR  less than one or greater  than one whi ch is more reliable? Definitely greater  than one 
right because the weight of feed intake divided by weight gained by the aquatic s pecies it 
should always be more than one it cannot be less than one , if it is less than one that means 
there are feed already available they are all some how they got some natural feeds.  
Because the amount of feed that you will supply that it is 100  percent  used, but like it is 
completely converted into biomass then the repeat conversion ratio will be one which is like 
maximum eff icient one , the maximum efficient cases it can be one . All the other cases it will 
be as high as possible. The lesser the number i s, the better the efficiency. You get my point, is  
not it? The lesser the number , more near to one is the better the efficienc y of the strategy or 
your feed or your species.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:04 )  
 
So, just to give you more in details, so, in general  it ranges from 1 to 2.4  for farmed fish and 
shrimp.  Aquatic organisms have fairly low FCR in comparison to the land animal. I f you see 
in case of like the cow , pigs, and chicken , in case of cow it can go up to 6 to 10 what does that mean you a re supplying  10 kg of feed actually one kg is actually utilized by  them  out of 
them. So, that means the ratio is 10 by 1 which is 10.  
So, after supplying 10 kg of feed, they can on ly be utilized 1 kg of it to convert it to into their 
biomass. At the same time, the fi sh has a very low FCR  which means the aquatic species are 
much more efficient. So it will cause less harm to the environment i n all senses, so, that  is 
why the global wa rming most of the, aquaculture and agriculture sectors especially livestock 
sector is f eeling very, like it  is not as something good to say but it  is actually major reason for 
global warming and all . 
Because they cause a huge environmental impact , this livestock farming  and all . So, when we 
go for this, these different catalysts and all this, this is very harmful in general, the amount of 
feed conversion is very low, I mean, like, feed conversion  ratio is very high , that means the 
efficiency is very low, it also ex cretes a lot of obnoxious  gases and all which are also 
harmful.  
So, in general overall, harmful greenhouse production is also very high in case of this land 
animals. In case  of aquatic species , it is less, but still as because you are , kind of culturing it  
in a very high amount, it can be as similar to t hat you know, do  not pull like it  is not it  is non 
go ahead with the do  not pull yourself with a number.  
In case of land animals the number is less , the number of rearing species  is less in per unit 
area, b ut in case of aquatic  species, the number of species per unit area is very high. So, even 
though the feed conversion ratio is like near to 1 or select 2 or 3, still it can cause huge 
environmental impact.  And it does cause actually, huge  environmental impa ct that people are 
still working on how to improv e the feed conversion ratio ?  
How to improve the overall efficiency of the system, so that it will cause less greenhouse 
impact less global warming effect . In general, what is the reason why the aquatic  organism 
has low FCR  because they tend to stay u p. They spend less energy to move and also they 
regulate their body temperature due to buoyancy and ectothermic in nature, you know what is 
exothermic or in gen eral we call cold blooded animals .  
This ectoth ermic are the se animals they have a very poor reg ulation system thermal 
regulation system in their body, they normally depend upon the depend on the environment to 
which you are they are dwelling.  So, because of that they have to utilize less amount of 
energ y for thermal regulations and like not like us , not like the land animals. So, that  is why they are called ectothermic in nature, and because of this nature, they utiliz e maximum  
amount of feed and because o f that very low FCR is witnessed.  
FCR  has severa l limitations as a measure of efficienc y, it does not take into account the 
nutritional content of the feed, it does not account the portion of the feed that is actually been 
eaten and also it does not take i nto consider ation the nutritional quantity, qual ity, quality and 
quantity both okay fir st one is quantity and thing the third one is the quality of the edible 
portions.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:53 )  
 
If you see this figure you can have a better idea about t he what we have discussed about the 
aquatic and terrestrial pond animal species. Terres trial if you see the aquatic ones, the giant 
tiger prawn , common  carp, this pangas catfish, tilapia , grass carp , channel catfish they have 
FCR  of around more or less 1 to 2 or sometimes a little bit higher than 2 so w hich says it is a 
higher it  is a good o ne so the efficiency  is much better when it is near to 1. 
In case of beef cattle it can go up to 8 , 10 in case of  a pig it is like 4, 5 in case of chicken also 
it is aro und 2. So it is like more efficient than the  aquati c species  and you know t he lesser 
value signifies the higher efficiency we already discussed.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:41 )  
 
Thus,  these limitations that we discuss for FCR  are potentially a flawed tool so metimes for 
cross species comparison. So, when we g o for this cross  species comparison, it is always 
better to have a much more reliable tool as we discussed about the other limitations right . 
Based on the extensive analysis done by different researchers a ll over the world , a more 
precise measure called t he protein or calorie eff iciency ratio is coming out.  
So, what is a protein efficiency or calorie efficiency ratio ? This ratio it measures the 
efficiency with which an aquatic organisms convert the nutrien t present in feed into the 
nutrients that can be s upplied as food to humans . What does that mean ? The gram of protein 
in edible portion divided by gram of protein in feed . This gram of protein we considered 
human as you know, like kind of base . 
So if it is  like this nutrient  can be supplied to as a food t o human , good one, that  is the perfect 
one that is actually the one that we required. So, because in general whenever we talk about 
all these nutrients and all about all this body biomass and all these thin gs about this aquatic 
species, final target is most  of the cases human cons umption, it i s for our purpose only that is 
what we do.  
So, protein retention  or calorie retention , when we talk about it, we can have a based animal 
like us humans, and we can con sider the grams of protein of the edible portion, which can be 
consumed by the human divided by the grams of protein available in the feed that is called 
the protein retention  which is more important tha n the FCR and all.  (Refer Slide Time: 26:32 )  
 
Because that is the one that we normally worry about ri ght. So, how we can do t hat edible 
portion multiplied by the gram of protein per gram of per 100 gram of edible  portion divided 
by food conversion ratio multiplied by gram of protein presence in 100 gram o f fee d. So, 
from this equation, we can have idea ab out the amount of protei n that is actually available for 
the human to up  take.  
Protein retention = (gram protein in edible portion)/ (gram protein in feed)  
    = [(edible portion) ×(gram protein per 100 g ram of edible portion) ] / [(FCR) 
×(gram protein per 100 gram feed ) 
The factors which are driving the protein retention  includes the FCR  definitely , also the 
concentration of protein in feed  and also the edible portion of the feed. So, this act ually 
include s all the disadvantages of FCR in this equation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:15 )   
Another one that we normally go ahead some experts believe that this is more precise 
calculation of efficiency of any aquatic species on the foo d conversion is the c alorie retent ion 
what does that mean the edible portion first of all, you have a sup pose aquatic species and 
among them they have different parts which are not applicable which are not which we 
cannot use it in general, we just throw it at the end of , like the bones and other parts . 
We normally say like fine flesh or sometimes the oil sometimes t he liver anyway, so, just 
giving you an example, you have to know the edible portion multiplied by the calorie per 100 
gram of edible portion divided by food conver sion ratio mu ltiplied by calorie per 100 gram of  
actual feed .  
Calorie retention = (calories  in edible portion)/(calories in feed)  
    = [(edible portion) × (calories per 100 gram of edible portion)]/ 
[(FCR) × (calories per 100 gram feed)] 
This equation will give us the exact value of calorie that is actually present for human 
consumption isn't it and that can give you a give us an exact comparison between all these all 
these aqua tic species and the land species or any like, obviously land and aquatic species.  
So, but in this case, unlike FCR , higher protein and calorie retention signifies higher 
effici ency. So, on an average , 100 grams of protein present in aquafeed  can be converted i nto 
19 grams of protein for supply as  food to human that means, it has 19  percent  retenti on at the 
same time, if suppose you have 100 kilo calorie of aquafeed  that can be c onverted into 10 
kilo calorie of the human food supply that means, the calorie reten tion is 10  percent.  This is the example and a very standard values almost. So, that mean s the around  19 percent  
protein retention and 10  percent  calorie retentio n can take place when it is aquafeed .  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:12 )  
 
Now, let  us have a look abo ut what happened to the other species. If you see this picture, the 
this red , deep red o ne are showing the calorie retention and the light red one are showing the 
protein retention unlike FCR . Here, the more the efficiency, the better the indicates the mor e 
efficient retention right. So higher the value is better unlike FCR .  
In this case, if  you see the scale of giant t iger prawn, common carp, all  aquatic species  has a 
pretty much almost 15 to 25 percentage even in case of Atlantic salmon  it can go up to 3 0 
percentage  of protein retention,  which is very high. So that i s why I put atlantic sal mon is 
considered as a very rich source of protein for human co nsumption.  
Same time calorie intake also very high in case of atlantic salmon compared to prawn, carp 
and all the other things. So, rainbow trout s and all,  so this rainbow trout s, atlantic sal mon are 
the one which are very sought after species that  is why in aquatic species  because they can 
have very high amount of calorie intake and calorie retention , capacity  and also protein 
retention capacity, which will give actual benefit to us to human for human consumption.  
Whereas, if you talk about  the beef, pig and the chicken, chicken has a very high very high 
protein conversion, that  is why it is a very standard prac tice to have chicken in, in a meal and 
all, most of the non-vegetarian  people love to have chicken but depending upon the place and 
the religious belief, people can go ahead with the beef and pigs as well .  In general, it can be easily supplemented by the aquatic species is like atlantic salmon , or 
rainbow trout and even channel catfish and all. S o that  is what that is possible by  only fish 
you can somehow replicate somehow replace the land animals and all so, anyway . (Refer Slide Time: 31:16 )  
 
So, this is the information that I want to give. So, give you a better idea about that, how we 
can properly distinguish between or compa re between different animals in terms of ratio. So, 
protein and calorie intake ratio is much more efficient way of judging than t he feed 
conversion ratio. So, you should know this  fact.  
This is the this is a tab le where the data used in calculating the pr otein and the calorie 
retention  for different aquatic and terrestrial farmed animal species like car ps or different 
kinds of car ps, trout fish es, prawn,  cattle , chicken , pig and these values are given this what i s 
the FCR  ratio what is the edible protein available, you can take a picture and you can pause 
the video and you can give it a look for your understanding.  
(Refer Slide Time:  31:52 )  
 So, in conclusion, this phytase , protease and alpha amylase  are some o f the most used 
enzyme in aquafeed . And also the incorporation of mycotoxin binding agents or adsorbent 
infeed  additives can facilitate the reduction of mycotoxin uptake , uptake which is harmful 
and also distribution in the blood and target organs. FCR  provides a good indication on  the 
efficiency of the fee d or however, there are better options as well, which are the protein and 
the calorie efficiency ratios calorie efficienc y and all .  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:24 )  
 
In case of the what is a takeaway message  from this lecture, and tha t this phytate,  availability 
and the digestibility of this phytate  phosphorus are very low in fish for fish. So, phytase  as 
enzyme it is used to facilitate  the availability of phosphorus to such organisms, not only that, 
the incor poration of mycotoxin bind ing agents and a dsorbents can facilitate the reduction in 
the mycotoxin uptake and their distribution in our organs.  
And high efficiency is typically indi cates a lower FC R value. However, higher protein and 
calorie retention, it can signify very high effi ciency for that particular animal for in taking for 
human intake  purpose and all.  (Refer Slide Time: 33:07 )  
 
So, overall, this is the reference that you can ch eck and you can go ahead for your own 
understanding on this subject.  So, overall in th is module, we have discussed very nicely about 
a very and also very overall discussion we did on the aquafeed  and different aquafeed  
technologies that is available and what are the feed additives?   
How to feed form formula te feed, what ar e the nutrie nts? Or what are the different ratios that 
we need to understand ? So I hope it i s helpful to you. That  is it for now. We will  come with 
the next module  in the next session . Thank you  so much.  
 