Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 33  
Aerator performance  
(Refer Slide Time:  00:31 ) 
 
Hello, everyone. Welcome to the third lecture of Module 7 , Water Quality Management of the 
subject Advanced Aquaculture Technology . My name is Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick , I 
am from the Agricultural and Food Engineering Department of IIT Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:41)  
 
So, in this lecture, I  will be continuing with the discussion that we already had about the 
aerators , different kinds of aerators  the necessity and the performance details . So, here, we  will 
more cover the theoretical part of it . So, we will discuss about the theory of gas transfer, how 
the overall gas transfer coefficient can be calculated and you can find it out for your design 
aerator.  And all  
And what are the different types of aeration al system requirements and the evolution  of the 
capacity of aerators  in case of using the unsteady state procedure and steady state test 
procedure. So, all these tests procedures will be discussed in details and in the follow up lecture, 
I will be discussing with you a couple of real-life scenar io where we  will do all the calculations 
by ourselves to find out the different aeration  efficiency, oxygen trans fer rate, etcetera . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:36)  
 
So, here with we start with a theory of gas transfer first. So, in order to discuss about the ga s 
transfer, because you know that is the basic of aerators.  right  Now, when we discuss what 
aerators  is nothing but it will help us enhancing the transfer rate of the gas for a particular gas 
from atmosphere to liquid state o r atmosphere to water state , from to the water.  okay  
So, this dissolved rate , this dissolved gas transfer  from  atmosphere to water, it actually involves 
four different steps . First, if I talk about say oxygen, so,  okay  oxygen molecule, first it moves 
from the bulk gaseous state. So, in this case, its atmosphere , from gas -liquid interface . okay  
So, it is  like suppose I have a wall . okay  So, one side there is gas in the other side I have liquid 
and this is the wall or thi s is the interface that I am talking about . okay  
So, from  in the beginning, from gas, the water will get attached to the gas -liquid interface  first, 
then from this gas -liquid interface, the oxygen will diffuse through this laminar gas and then 
the laminar liquid film.  After it reaches the liquid film then it goes to the diffuse bulk liquid 
phase . Again, there are four steps , first from the bulk gaseous state to the gas liquid separator 
or the gas liquid interface. There we have say two liquid films, two fil ms. okay  
First film is the laminar gas  film. S econd is the laminar liquid film. So, it will transfer , in the 
second step it will diffuse through the liquid film sorry laminar gas film.  The third stage it will 
diffuse through the laminar liquid film . At the end it comes in contact with the liquid phase and 
it will directly diffuse  to the bulk liquid phase . You understand , right?  
These four different steps that involves in a way, it is a very basic steps of dissolution of gas 
into water . okay This is a very important because you need to know this funda  otherwise in 
future when we will be discussing about details like how these different phenomenas  different 
equations  we will be discussing , you have to remember this very easy four steps . okay Then 
this oxygen transfer , this oxygen transfer it does depend on different parameters . 
We already discussed , right ? Remember, we discussed about the involvement of the 
dependency on the area to volume ratio . okay  Second thing , the difference between the 
saturation gas concentration and the measured  gas concentration . okay  So, these two are the 
major parameter in which the rate of oxygen transfer actually depends on . okay  
So, if I theoretically represents you this all these fundamentals  that I have just discussed, how 
it can be described , how it can be presented , dC by dt like the change in the rate of oxygen 
transfer with time. This C is what , C is the gas concentration , the concentration is denoted by 
the denotes by the  letter , this alphabet C . So, d C by dt is the rate of oxygen transfer or in general 
gas transfer, it is equal to K L, this KL is the liquid fill coefficient . okay  
How this coefficient is coming into the picture ? Just forget about KL first and forget about this 
equaled . First, this dC by dt is directly proportional to the ratio of air to water interfacial area 
to water volume that is A  by V.  And also , it directly proportional to the difference between the 
saturated gas concentration minus measured gas  concentration or dissol ved oxygen 
concentration . okay  
So, dC by dt it directly proportional to these two factors.  In order to make it in an equation 
form what we do we simply add one coefficient, we name it liquid film coefficient or KL in 
short  okay . To make it more easier  because see we when we discuss about a particular type of aerator, the basin  that we  will be using or the tank that I will be using is same , right? So once 
the tank that I  will be using is same for say like  any particular type of aerator  at different 
cond itions. So, this A by V ratio is also same . Considering this A by V ratio which is also 
constant for your particular experiment and KL which is a coefficient which is also a constant.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:28)  
 
So, considering this both of this factor we came up with this idea of a term which is composite 
coefficient term which we call overall gas transfer coefficient K La. okay  This overall gas 
transfer coefficient is KL multiplied by this surface area to volume ratio.  okay  This is this 
number is , it is a constant for a particular experiment that we  will be doing for any particular 
aerator  okay . So, now, the equation reduces down to d C by dt equal to KLa into Cs minus Cm. 
okay  
When we do this integration of oxygen  deficits say like from  t1 to t2 okay , from time  t1 to t2. 
So, during this time , this is aeration  time, during this time if we do the integration of this 
equation this dC by dt equal to KLa multiplied by Cs minus Cm will come up with KLa equal 
to Ln(OD)1 minus Ln(OD)2 over t2 minus  t1. W hat is this  OD 1? T his OD is the oxygen deficit . 
okay How do we calculate this oxygen deficit ? 
We know the saturation concentration  right? , Cs. A t t1 what will be the DO?  Say suppose 
when you start your aeration  the DO at the beginning it was 3 milligram per liter or say like  3 
PPM  okay . And we know that saturation concentration is 9.07 milligram per liter at 20 degrees 
Celsius. So, what will be the DO deficit in this particular case ? 9.07 minus 3 which is 6.07 , so 
this is the DO deficit 1. 
Secondly, DO deficit 2 say like after 1 hour of continuous aeration, your DO level increase to 
6 PPM . So, now, what will be the DO deficit?  9.07 minus 6 which is 3.07 PPM , so, this is the 
DO deficit  or oxygen deficit 2. If you do the logarithmic log of these two,  this log of  OD 1 
minus log of OD 2 divided by  t2 minus  t1 you will get the value of KLa which is like overall 
gas transfer coefficient  value.  you,  You understand the point ? 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:44)  
 
So, now, what are the parameters at which this overall gas transfer  coefficient is actually 
depending on ? One of the major parameters i s temperature . You might have realized that every 
time I discussed I was telling about the saturation concentration and a ll the value whenever I 
am mentioning the value every time I am mentioning the temperature because temperature is a 
major factor we already discussed based on like temperature can change the diffusion rate like 
anything.  
So, this overall  gas transfer coeff icient is also depending upon the temperature . How we can 
calculate this value , revised value at any temperature ? It can be easily calculated , like when we 
have like say KLaT  at a particular type of at a particular temperature say like instead of 20 
degree  we want to get the value at 30 degrees Celsius . At 30 degrees Celsius, so KLa30 is equal 
to KLa20 which is standard multiplied by theta to the power  t minus 20.  
Here , the capital T has to be replaced with 30. So, the equation will become KLa30 equal to 
KLa20 multiplied by theta to the power 30 minus 20 which is 10. This theta, th is theta value is 
typically varies from 1.016 to 1.047, based on different types of aerators  and all , in different 
conditions. In general, you  will be provided with the value thi s theta value . 
So, this theta factor is actually the factor which gives you the correction for temperature  effect . 
You understand ? So, that is  how we finalize, we got to know the value of overall gas transfer 
coefficient at a particular temperature.  okay  Remember , this T is here the T is actually 
calculated in degrees Celsius . Do not use the Fahrenheit values.  
Here, the T is in degrees Celsius is the equation, whenever we  will be using this equation , if 
you have a data in Fahrenheit, convert it into the deg rees Celsius and then use it. okay  So, this 
KlaT is like  overall,  so now, if I am asking you, like at any temperature, and I am providing 
you the data for the theta value, the temperature factor, and also, I will give you the value for 
the K La20, you can easily find out the overall gas  transfer  coefficient at that particular 
temperature whether it be 10 , 30, 40, 50 anything  okay . So, that is how we find out the overall 
gas transfer coefficient.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:20)  
 
Now, so based on that, we have to go for this different requirements of aeration systems .right?  
When we  will be designing the aerator , this design will definitely has to be on the basis of 
something . So, the first thing is the amount of oxygen that you need to supply.  Okay. And the 
second thing minimum DO concentration  that you are expecting to have in your system. These 
two are the basic criteria on the basis of what you  will have to choose the aerator  and you have 
to choose its efficiency . 
You have to choose its power performance and everything . So, in general, the aerator  when 
you choose, you have to choose on the basis of the amount of oxygen that it requires and the 
minimum DO consideration  that you  are expecting in your system . Okay IN A  On a thumb 
rule, whenever, like you do  not have much of a details about the system design and everything . 
okay  So, you just remember this equation, average oxygen demand in kg per day, this is a 
thumb rule, I am again saying in case of fish or something normal fish if you are  culturing fish 
in your tank.  
So, at least you tried to provide 0.2 percent,  like 20  percentage  of your feed value . So, if 
suppose your feed value is like suppose 100 kg per day, at least your average oxygen demand 
has to be 20 kg per day. You got my point?  So, this value  this is  actually this value  is actually 
daily feed allotment , this is the standard kind of thumb rule , okay  look at this is not true for 
everything . 
Anyway, we  will be discussing in details , like how we can find out the actual value , actual 
oxygen demand and all , but this is like a thumb rule if you do  not have any other details you 
can go ahead with this . okay  And in case of maximum oxygen demand, which should not be 
more than say like 30  percent  around 0.29 times of the daily feed allotment . 
So, just remember these values.  okay  So, this is just a thumb rule , this is not actual all the time 
it may , you can survive with this , with this value you can like I mean like you can go ahead 
with these calculations  for the time being but it is better to go ahead with the pr oper calculation 
and proper designing . And all okay  
In case of shrimp  also we have this specific value for like in general  for shrimp  respiration we 
follow this equation , it is a standard equation which we normally follow when we calculate the 
requirement of oxygen for our shrimp , any shrimp produce. So, it is like 0.487 multiplied by 
W to the power 0 .881 whereas this W stands for the weight of  shrimp weight of  the individual 
shrimp or total shrimp,  this is based on your calculation requirement , based on your data it 
actually  varies.  So, this equation you  are trying to remember shrimp  respiration is equal to the 
0.487 multiplied by W to the  power 0 .881. okay  (Refer Slide Time: 14:17)  
 
So, when we evaluate the capacity or the performance of any aerator , suppose you have 
designed some aerator  or you have procured any aerator  from a manufacturing company. So, 
you have to design you have to know the performance details . Most of the times it is given 
along with the aerator like it is in along  with the leaflet but depending upon your farm 
requirement depending upon the species that your cultur ing and depending upon, like your 
intent, the stocking density, oxygen requirement based on different factors, you have to know 
the performance of the aerator on that pa rticular scenario . okay  
So, in general, how to define or how to evaluate the capacity of aerator, there are two different 
procedures given by Colt and Orwicz  1991 its in his paper, the first one is the steady state 
procedure and the unsteady state procedur e okay . So, in the beginning we  will discuss about 
the unsteady state  procedure, which is more famous and more commonly used all over the 
world. And there is another one with a steady state procedure . I will be discussing with you 
about it in details later  slides.  
In case of unsteady state procedures, what we do , it is a standard test of aerator , we we have a  
like you know  basin of a clean water at a standard temperature and pressure at like, standard 
temperature means here I am always discussing , whenever I will say standard temperature, it 
means 20 degrees Celsius. And whenever I  will be saying standard pressure, or the atmospheric 
pressure, that means I am talking about 760 millimeters of mercury pressure . Okay. 
So, remember this the 760 millimeter of Hg and 20 degrees Celsius, that is what the standard 
temperature pressure . Whenever I  will be discussing about it in I  will be saying about it in this 
aerator  performance evolution . So, this STP  is 760 millimeter of Hg and  20 degrees  Celsius.  
The basin it can  be of concrete or the cinderblock construction . The water has to be first 
deoxygenated with the sodium sulfite.  
Why to deoxygenated it ? Very easy, I told you , it’s very easy for you to understand the value 
the aerator  performance, you can better be unders tand when the actual condition when it will 
start aerating  at that moment the water at which it is dwelling . Suppose like you  are starting , 
you are doing the performance test, it is better to have the DO level  as low as possible at the 
beginning . Say  supposed almost near to none  or, near to 0.  
The moment it is almost near to 0 and you  know  notice saturation concentration is like 9.07. 
So, you have a wide gap, when you have a wide gap and with time it will keep on replenishing 
the DO level  what will happe n you will get a very nice curve and your test procedure will be 
more fine or more accurate . okay  So, that’s why, you know the oxygen scavenging , so now  
sodium sulfide is a very standard oxygen scavenger . 
So, we use this sodium sulfide for deoxygenated pur pose or otherwise there are other thumb  
rules also. What we do, as you know, is simply go for boiling the water.  Suppose you have , 
definitely it is not possible for when you have a very huge amount of basin , very huge amount 
of pond size.  And all  But in small cases what we do , normally it is a standard practice 
sometimes , we boil the water , when we boil the water all the oxygen all the gas and all it gets 
transferred to the atmosphere.  
Then you close  the lid and put it in you know , try to cool it down . Like Let it cool down for a 
couple of hours or so . What will happen that water will be very low in air concentration, like 
very low in diffused air . Whether it be oxygen or any other . okay So, that is also a standard 
way of doing that, but in general whe n you will be discussing about this huge basin definitely 
is not possible.  
So, there will use different kinds of chemical scavengers , sodium sulfide is one of them . Also, 
this process is can be further enhanced or if you add the cobalt chloride CoCl2.  Cobalt chloride 
is used as a catalyst for this reaction to take place much faster way . okay  So, cobalt get chloride 
is used as a positive catalyst here and sodium sulfide is used as n oxygen scavenging chemical 
here. Now, the final product that we  will be getting it is highly deoxygenated , okay  that means 
the dissolved oxygen level is very low.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:51)  
 
Now, the you will  start your experiment . Once you start the experiment , what do I mean by 
start the experiment,  you start running th e aerator . So, once you start  the start  running the 
aerator and you have different DO meter or DO probes  fit at different position of your tank, 
you can monitor in real -time scenario that how the development is getting increased , from 0 
say like after 10 m inutes is like 2, then after 10 minutes is like 2.5 , after 10 minutes is 3.5 , like 
this it will keep on increasing.  
That value you have to write it down or somehow you have to jot it down neatly after a possible 
in per minute  manner. Or in general case, at least 2 to 3 minutes after or 5 minutes after . You 
write it down and then you make a graph out of it. So, from that graph, why we need this graph , 
I will tell you , how to calculate the different aeration efficiency that sinc e I will go and discuss 
about  in detail . 
So, in general during the test the amount of oxygen transferred and the DO concentration  
change is measure,  so that is  why this process is called unsteady state procedure. You 
understand the reason why it is called unsteady state because you are changing the 
concentration of DO with time and you  are calculating the aeration  efficiency and aeration  
transit , oxygen transfer rate . 
So, based on that , because of that it is called unsteady state  procedure.  In general , to discuss 
more in detail, it is better to provide it with the theoretically at least 7.8 8 milligram per liter of 
sodium sulfate per 1 milligram per liter of oxygen to be remove d, cobalt chloride concentration 
of around 0.1 to 0 .5 is better, but it should  not fall below 0.1 milligram per liter at any point of 
time.  
The aerator  when you start when you turn it on the chemical slurries  has to be mixed until the 
DO of the basin drops to 0. And cobalt chloride should be added first and then the aerator must 
be run for at least 30 minutes for thorough mixing. Once the thorough mixing is done when the 
DO level drops to 0 then we start calculating the procedure , start the procedures actual 
procedures when we start writ e it down the values . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:01)  
 
The zero reading is taken at a regular interval and once the  DO concentration  reaches 90  percent  
of the saturation . What does that mean? As I told you at 20 degree Celsius an d then  STP 9.07 , 
90 percent  of it when it reaches like say around 8 or 8.1 milligram per liter once it will reach 
the DO concentration  of your tank you should stop the experiment . 
So, once you  will start from say like 0 or something and once it will reach like 7, 8, 7.58 
something like that, you stop the experiment . Stop the experiment and that will be you start 
calculating the measure  the further details . There are two standard rules for it , saturation 
concentration either , there are three actually , first, we already discussed 90  percent  of the total 
saturation concentrat ion. 
Second, the saturation concentration is normally released when the run lasts for at least the 
period equal to 6 by KLa.  You know KLa, right? The overall oxygen  transfer coefficient . And 
you also know what is the unit of  it, it is  time inverse like second inverse or minute inverse or 
hour inverse , right? This is the unit . 
So, if you  divided this 6 divided by KLa in time it will get the value in time. That time , that 
minute or that hour is the time for which it takes normally for reaching the saturation 
concentration. This is the standard way of dealing , it is a very standard procedure . Or I suppose 
the saturation concentration that remains unchanged at least for  15 minutes after the test time 
has reached  5 by KLa.  
In all these three cases you should understand that you should stop the experiment  now. 
Because you have reached the saturation, almost reached the saturation concentration, it does  
not make sense to go  ahead further it will take a lot of time to reach the actual saturation 
concentration . So, that duration you have to , you calculate up to this duration and you go ahead 
with the further calculations . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:15)  
 
In general , how to calculate these things, you remember these values,  try to understand the 
basics behind this equation . Standard oxygen transfer rate from the name itself you can easily 
understand it means the transfer rate of oxygen that means kg of oxygen per hour , this is the 
standard unit that by which we can easily denote it like say SOTR.  
How to calculate this  SOTR?  It is simple enough , you just multiply with the overall gas transfer 
coefficient KLa at 20 multiplied by the saturation concentration at 20 multipl ied by V that is 
the volume of your bas in multiplied by 10 to the power  minus 3. Why  10 to the minus 3? Let 
me give you , I am breaking it down  so that you will get this proper dimensional analysis as 
well as you can understand the unit behind it . 
SOTR, we quantify it by means of kg of oxygen per hour. KLa, what is the unit of it , per second 
or per time. Say like per hour per minute whatever . Cs, which is the DO concentration . In 
general , it is in milligram per liter , milligram per liter the same value can be converted to gram 
per meter  cube , but because it is like simply 1000 multiplied by 1000 multiplied by 1000 both 
a numerator and denominator . 
So, milligram per liter is equal to gram per meter cube . So, this gram p er meter cube, so now 
if you say K La20 which is 1 by T, 1 by time multiplied by gram per meter cube . So, say like 1 
by hour multiplied by gram per meter cube multiplied by  V, V is in meter  cube,  so meter cube  
meter cube will get cancelled out then gram in order to convert it to the kg you do this multiplied 
with 10 to the power minus 3. 
So, if you multiply with 10 to power  minus 3, now, it will become kg per hour that is the for 
SOTR . So, that is  how we calculate the standard oxygen transfer rate . Second part is much 
easier , Standard Aeration  Efficiency. O nce you know the standard oxygen transfer rate just 
simply divid e it with the energy consumption or in general the aerator that you will be using it 
is per unit of energy consumption at standard condition . 
In general,  the power input , if you see the power input for this kind of aerator are normally 
expressed in kilo watt or hp, hp means  horsepower, you know horsepower , it is like around 746 
746 watt is in 1 horsepower . So, from this value, you can simply c alculate the standard aeration  
efficiency which is kg of oxygen per hour per kilowatt. These two are very important parameter 
you have to really remember this equation, it is very easy, but it is very important parameter 
for calculating discussing anything  about the aerators.  (Refer Slide Time: 26:18)  
 
We discuss about standard oxygen transfer rate , we discuss about standard aeration  efficiency, 
we now if we discuss about standard oxygen transfer efficiency, this is not the aeration 
efficiency , this is not that , this is we  are discussing a more standard oxygen transfer efficiency . 
That can also be calculated very easily , you simply divided with a mass transfer of oxygen . 
During that period of time or on an average what is the rate of oxygen that is getti ng transferred . 
Mass transfer means, here the unit will be kg per hour . So, it will be kg per hour when you 
divide , when you divide the SOTR with th is mass transfer rate  of oxygen  you will get the value 
of standard oxygen transfer efficiency . This is what all we discuss, it is all about the unsteady 
state procedure.  
What will be the case like when we discussed about the steady state procedure. In case of steady 
state, the problem is like you cannot directly test your aerator in the pond water condition. 
There are some problems . There are a lot of problems involved with that I  will discuss with 
you in detail . Because in case of unsteady state, you can do it in clean water . So, you can easily 
rise from 0 to almost 90  percent  of the saturation and all the thing s. 
But in case of pond water directly if you want to measure it is difficult . There are some 
problems , first of all that pond water  may not always be under 0 and exact 20 degrees Celsius . 
DO consternation of the pond water is obviously always more than 0, you cannot do it , you 
cannot make it 0 because if you start making it 0 all the aquatic animals are already there they 
will die.  
So, steady state condition is more like in real -time situation under the field condition, but it 
cannot be done, it can be don e, there are some factors it involves, I  will discuss with you next 
say, next slide. And the problem is the rate of oxidation of the tap water is easily much greater 
than compared to the pond water because of it holds the impurities , discrete particles . 
When we discuss about impurities, I mainly focus on different kinds of surfactant , when we 
discuss about the district particles , we discuss upon different suspended solids, dissolved solids , 
etcetera . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:41)  
 
See this procedure. So, in ca se of steady state test procedure,  clean water, we know that the 
clean water holds more oxygen at saturating point then the pond water . Second thing , pond that 
content fish , phytoplankton , bottom sediments are referred to as the respiring  systems are quite 
different from the t est basins.  
So, there is a continuous deduction in DO is going on when you  are experimenting in case of 
real-time scenario in the field conditions steady state condition . And also , the pond water is 
much turbid  than the clean water that also makes a huge difference in the proper disseminating 
of oxygen molecules over the water body.  
Therefore, the scientists came up with the idea that the testing procedure when it will be done 
in real -time condition like saying field condition we have to introduce couple of factors . First 
one we knew we call it alpha factor , alpha factor is the ratio between the overall gas transfer 
coefficient of pond  water upon overall gas transfer coefficient of the clean water . 
Why it is important ? Just give you an one example , one simple example , just remember it , this 
alpha value is majorly depend on the surfactants,  different kinds of impurities because in the 
presence of surfactant what will happen , it will reduce the surface tension of water and once it 
will reduce the surface tension of water it will affect on the overall  gas transfer coefficient  as 
well.  
Because of that the alpha value is it is in case of K La20 it is much higher than pond water in  
general . Same in case of beta , this beta factor is equal to the DO concentration  at the particular 
temperature or particular field condition and the saturation concentration at real -time at like 
clean water at the same temperature. So, how does it matter ? Because at the same temperature 
saturation concentration of DO can be low can be high anything . 
But in general,  it can be high , why high , because this value this water , in pond water it is turbid 
in nature , it has different other factors different other dissolved material , like dissolved solids, 
suspended solids , etcetera.  They have their own heat capacities . So, because of all this reason, 
what happened the beta value the actual saturation concentration can be higher than in clean 
water scenario, that is  why this beta value is introduced.  
So, now, if I say what will be the field oxygen transfer rate, earlier we discussed about the 
standard oxygen transfer rate , it will almost same, but we have to introduce couple of factors . 
The equation will become OTR f which is like field oxygen transfer rate which can also be 
given in kg per hour equal to alpha into SOTR 20 like standard often transported at 20 degrees 
Celsius multiplied by theta temperature correction  factor to the power t minus 20 multiplied by 
beta Cs minus beta Cm. 
This beta Cs is the factor which will help you to eliminate the problems related to these 
impurities like solid impurities . So, this beta into Cs which is like the clean water DO saturation 
minus measured  DO saturation a t the pond for tes t condition . Divided by 9.092 . What is this 
value coming from ? 
This is the value of Cs at 20 degrees Celsius and 760 millimeter of Hg. So, if you know this 
equation, it is very important this equation we need to utilize it more and more in other aerators  
discussion and all . (Refer Slide Time: 32:28)  
 
So, from there how we can calculate this field oxygen transfer rate.  We already understand , 
this field oxygen transfer rate there is a simplified form of it as well . If you know , actually this 
table is given by Shelton and Boyd in 1983. So, what they have found out , in general this field 
condition , field oxygen  transfer rate is always equal  to almost proportional to , not proportional 
it based on some factor but this almost is prop ortional to this SOTR 20, like standard oxygen 
transfer rate at 20. 
This f value which you know varies a lot , this f value is can be easily calculated using this 
table . They have done an extensive study and they come out with this DO concentration  by at 
different temperature . If your temperature is lies between any of these points , so like  10, 15, 10 
to 35 , if any of this point you can interpolate easily and you can get the value even your  DO 
value is somewhere in between you can easily interpolate it and you can easily get the desired 
f value . You just simply multiply that f value  with SOTR 20 you will get your oxygen transfer 
rate at field condition . 
(Refer Slide Time: 32:44)  
 
So, this is what all everything about the aeration , different kinds of  aerators  and the values and  
the calculation procedures and all the equations that involved with it . In the next lecture, I will 
discuss with a real-time problem.  And we  will discuss , we will try to find out that how the 
different aeration  efficiency , standard oxygen  transfer rate and even field conditions in steady 
state condition, how we can calculate the steady state oxygen transfer rate.  
Aerator systems normally designed. So, in conclusion, we can say we discuss about the 
dependency of aeration syst ems for oxygen requirement in our farm or pond.  It is necessary to 
test the commercially available aerators  under a rigid  set of standard conditions to determine 
their ability to transfer oxygen and these tests are called the standard test or the clean tes t. 
(Refer Slide Time: 34:49)  
 
Designing aerator  is very important for your culture species which is like which is crucial step 
which will decide the cost of operation and the efficiency of your aeration systems . Following 
a standard testing procedure,  it can give you the proper evolution of the aerators and which is 
a must pre -requisite before you use it in your farm. So, that is it for now in this lecture material . 
(Refer Slide Time: 35:06)  
 
These are the reference that you can go through. Thank you so much. In the coming lecture, I  
will be discussing about the different real -time example and we got to know more in detail and 
you to be better if you have a calculator with you . So, to do the calculations by yourself . Thank 
you so much. See you in the next  lecture.  
