Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture  45 
Bio-floc Technology  
Hello everyone, welcome to the Lecture 5 of Module 9. My name is Profess or Gourav Dhar 
Bhowmick , I am from the Agricultural and Food Engineering of IIT Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:36)  
 
In this lecture material, the concepts that I  will be covering are the prerequisites for 
sustainable aquacultur e, the bio -floc technology,  how this BFT works, what are the 
composition and the nutritional value of bio-floc, what are the advantages of it , what are the 
cultivable species in bio-floc technology , and the  preparation of inoculum.  Other than that we  
will go ahead with the bio-floc evaluation and the monitoring systems and what are the 
challenges for future research . I hope this particular lecture material will definitely help you 
with understanding the bio-floc technology , not only that but you can util ize it in your field as 
well. (Refer Slide Time: 1:21)  
 
The prerequisites for sustainable aquaculture is like aquaculture must expand considering the 
following goals . First, to produce more aquaculture products without significantly increasing 
the uses of  basic natural resources of w ater and land. Second, to develop a sustainable 
aquaculture system that will not damage the environment .  
And the third , to build up a system which can provide an equitable cost and benefit ratio to 
support the economic and soc ial sustainability . So, based  on all these goals, we can go ahead 
with the sustainable aquaculture processes . So, if we can achieve these goals, we  can call this 
aquaculture practice as a sustainable aquaculture practice . All these three prerequisites  for the 
sustainable aquaculture development can be made by a technological by bio-floc. 
So, that is  why this bio-floc technology started becoming a very like high -end technology 
nowadays, people are using it very vigorously all over the world right now.  And so , it is very 
important for yo u guys to know what is this bio-floc technology and how it works and what is 
it like in general . (Refer Slide Time: 2: 45) 
 
When we talk about bio-floc technology, it is considered as a new blue revolution , blue 
revolution jus t like white revolution attac hed to the m ilk, in the same way blue revolution is 
attached to the development of aquatic species . So, the revolution , when you are  
revolutionising some the production system and everything and the technologies , 
technological ad vancement is there in your aquatic species culturing , so that comes under this 
blue revolution . 
And bio-floc technology  is actually one of the major reasons  behind it, which actually 
revolutionize this technology, this aquatic species culture , this aquacul ture in general . What is 
the reason ? Reason is , since the nutrient can be recycled and reused in the culture medium 
and benefited by the minimum to zero water discharge. So, how it is happening ? 
So, see BFT in general, it is an environmentally  friendly aqu aculture technique, which 
actually based on the in-situ microorganism  production . Either these bio-flocs  is normally is 
in the suspended growth condition, you remember we discussed about the suspended growth 
and the attached  growth , in case of trickling fi lter like that kind of wast ewater treatment 
system, it attached over the bio-media . 
Whereas in case of MBR, in case of activated sludge process, the culture is actually in 
suspended condition. So, that is  why we call them suspended growth process.  Bio-floc is a 
suspended growth of t hese ponds and tanks, which is the aggregates of l iving and the dead  
particular organic matter, phytoplankton, bacteria, grazers of the bacteria . It actually , not only 
the, it is not only the bio-floc that we  are talking about, i f you are  providing suffici ent 
condition the bio-floc will definitely develop . What is the benefit of it? So , this bio-floc, it is actually how it is helping. It is helping first of 
all, it is actually consuming the waste from the wastewater that is being generated from the 
aquacult ure ponds. Second thing, this bio-flocs  are actually being fed by your aquatic 
animals. Suppose you are  culturing of fish . So, bio-floc technology is a technology where this 
heterotrophic  growth of these organisms, these organism s are actually again can be  fed by 
your aquatic species, the culture d species . 
So, that is  how, it is like a nice circle like you have an aquatic spaces, it is dwelling over 
there, it is doing the extractor  all this extractor products, because of that the pollutant  level 
goes high, then it is treated then it is coming to this bio-floc tanks ther e this heterotrophic 
microorganisms they work on it, they feed on this pollutants , they consume the pollutants, 
they use it in their biomass, this biomass is nothing  but the nitrogen rich biom ass, the nutrient 
rich biomass.  
This nutrient rich biomass is again fed by the fish . So, see, you can idealize like, it is like a 
complete resource recovery, plus water and zero water discharge, like almost zero water 
discharge, it is really good, it is really high-end technology, that is if you can use it properly, 
it can give you a very high return , very high  sustainability issues, like in terms of 
sustainability  issues it is definitely it will reach the top , in terms of resourc e recovery is very 
high, in terms of feed application is very low , in terms of  yield it will be very high . 
So, all way it is like a win -win-situation for us . So, that is  why bio-floc technologies are like 
nowadays is in very demand . So, this system sometim es called active  suspension  pond or 
heterotrophic po nds or even green soup pond  also. (Refer Slide Time: 6:47)  
 
So, how it actually works ? I already discussed , let me give you another  round of discussion, 
like to make it more clear for you . This bio-floc system is actually wastewa ter treatment, 
which has gained vital importance  as an approach to the aqua culture, the principle of the 
technique is to maintain higher carbon to nitrogen ratio by adding carbohydrate source , the 
only source the only thing that is required in the system i s the carbohydrate source in general . 
I am talking about like this carbohydrate source has to be supplied almost every day . And the 
water quality is improved for the  production of high-quality  single cell microbial proteins . 
This heterotrophic microbial gr owth occurs which assimilates the nitrogenous waste into 
them, and that can be exploited by the culture species as  a feed. Also, it acts as a bioreactor 
by means of which it can control the water quality . (Refer Slide Time: 7:4 6) 
 
How it works?  We immobi lize the toxic nitrogen species, immobilization of the toxic 
nitrogen species, which occurred very more rapidly , which occurred in your fish culture tank  
that you can easily immobilize it, I mean like the toxic nitrogen pieces whi ch occurs in your 
tank can  be very readily immobilized in your BFT because growth rate and the microbial 
production per unit substrate of heterotrophs are 10 times greater than that of the autotrophic 
nitrifying bacteria, what does that mean?  
Let us  see th e picture again . We have a  bio-floc tank, we know that toxic  nitrogen species is 
generating in your tank in your fish culture tank. So, from fish culture tanks suppose you 
have a bio-floc culture tank different , in different tank. So, this fish culture was tewater is 
coming to your bio-floc tank,  earlier we used to have either bio-floc or normal membrane  
bio-rectors . 
In case of this membrane  bio-rectors all this kind of autotrophic nitrifying bacteria is around 
when we culture them . What happened , we use , we need to provide them with  oxygen. 
Second thing , this Nitrosomonas and azotobacter they actually normally they are autotropic 
in nature. So, for them their consumption rate the immobilization rate is much , sorry their 
growth rate and the microbial produc tion rate is almost 10 times  lesser than this hydrot ropic  
growth of this substrate  and heterotrophic growth of this microbial production in the BFT . 
Because of that, this high production rate of microbial community they can consume more 
amount of pollutan ts like in a very  feasible  manner. And once they produce a huge amount of 
pollutants, they made these flocs in the principles of flocculation . And once they made these flocs, then the y can be easily supplied to your rearing  species , they will cons ume it and by 
this way they can have a  very high amount of this protein rich live feeds . 
(Refer Slide Time: 9: 58) 
 
So, by a floc, it is a heterogeneous aggregat e of suspended particles and variety of 
microorganisms associated with extracellular polymeric substances . Composed of mainly the 
bacteria, algae, fungi, invertebrates and detritus , etcetera.  This composition of this bio -floc. 
So, how it happens , you see the unused  feed plus excreta , sunlight and the presence of 
vigorous aeration if you provide enou gh amount of aeration , it is very impo rtant, aeration is 
actually very important here . 
It will provide you this protein rich life feed that can this floc which is of size of around 50 to 
say like 200 microns, you know  micron right , it is 10 to the power minus 6-meter, it is called 
a micrometre , in general we call them micro n. These large flocs  are also visible other than 
this microscopic, microscopic one . It has a very high nutritional value . Dry weight protein 
concentration of this flocs  can go up to 50  percent . Can you imagine ? 
The fat can go  up to 15  percent age. Good source , it is also a good source of vitamin , 
minerals , like especially phosphorus and the probiotics, the essential microorganisms . That 
can be very easily fed to your fish and they will be v ery happy to have , to consume these 
vitamins , minerals and these probiotics . And it can directly replace your fish meal and the 
soybean meals from your fish feed . 
So, we discussed about it in a previous module remember that fishmeal it cost a lot and it wi ll 
increase the overall the cost for p roduction like anything for any kind of fish crops. If we can replace it with this kind of technologies , this bio -floc technology , it can be highly beneficial 
for like different purposes. Say it be reduction in the pro duction costs . Say it be higher in the  
yield . Say it be resource recovery . As I discussed it is like everything is good here . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:04 ) 
 
The basic factor in this designing this bio-floc system is the species that is needed to be 
cultured . Bio-floc systems works best with the s pecies that derive the nutritional benefit from 
the direct consumption of flo c. And also, it should tolerate very high solid concentration in 
water and poor water quality . Majorly this air breathing  fish like  Singhi, Magur, Pabda, 
Anabas or Koi, Pangasius . 
So, these are the ones which are normally very famous . So, this air breathing  fish are like 
they can consume or they can sustain a minor environmental changes they do not  get stressed 
much easily even little bit poor water quality also they can sustain , that is  why in this kind of 
bio-floc culture we use them . We also use some non-breathing  fishes  also like Common Carp, 
Rohu,  Tilapia , Milkfish . 
Also, the shellfish  like Vabbamei and  Tiger prawn can also be cultured usin g this bio-floc 
technology . So, for th em, the feed will be the bio-floc itself, the microorganism itself . And 
how this microphone organism is cultured , by consuming the nutrient coming from there  
excreta only . See, it is like a circle, it is like a proper circle.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:29)  
 
So, in order to give you an idea or the example of how it works, how to design or how to 
prepare the inoculum , so I am giving you one very specific example like with these two 
different methods . First one , say you have a 15,000 litre of fresh water which ne eds to be 
supplied with 150 litre of inoculum, at least 1 percent  of it. 
So, once the 1  percent  of the freshwater culture that you have you are  supplying it with the 
inoculum for the floc development, how will you supp ly, how will you go for this 
preparati on. First, this take the clean tub or can with 150 litre  of water and  this inoculum and  
continuously and like you continue the vigorous aeration , you provide the aerator,  diffuse d 
aerator lines in continuously aerated . 
Now , add 3 kg of pond  soil, 1.5 gram of ammonium sulpha te or urea plus 30 gram of carbon 
source , it can be jaggery , wheat flour,  tapioca flora, whatever available  with you . Remember 
this numbers , if you add those things, if you add 3 kg pond  soil, 1.5 gram of,  pond  soil means 
you have to have  a like old pond  it in not like very new pond,  you have to have an old pond  
where in the bottom you see they have this slurry like structure , it is like very slurry in nature.  
If you take from this bottom , if you dive in and take this pond soil, it is very enriched in  
diffe rent kind of essential microorganisms . This is a very rich source of essential 
microorganisms specially if it is like properly aerobic in nature , properly you are  aerating  the 
environment you can get different kind of aerobic microorganis ms, you can get di fferent 
aerobic nitrifying organisms , like different kinds of heterotrophic bacteria you will get, 
heterotrophic microorganisms you will get from this pond  soil. This ammonium sulphide  is supplied to , so that it will b e continuously suppl ied with the  
nitro gen source , 30 gram of carbon source  is required to maintain the carbon to nitrogen ratio , 
and mix it well with the water in  tub and provide  the adequate aeration . The inoculum  will be 
ready to by 24 to 48 hour  and it can be transferred t o the main tank . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:48)  
 
So, once you transfer to the main tank do not  forget to provide them with the carbon source 
every day . For every 1 kg of feed given say like 25  percent  of crude protein , 600 grams of 
carbon s ource is to be added  to the system to maintain the carbon to nitrogen ratio of 10 is to 
1. 1 kg of feed that you are  supplying with say like 25  percent  crude protein just to give you 
one exam ple. 
You have to supply with a 600 grams of carbon source to main tain the carbon to n itrogen 
ratio of 1 0 is to 1. Once the floc volume reaches 15 to 20 ml further addition  of carbon source  
is not required  remember that . What is another  method ? Take a clean tub or can with a 130 
litre of water and just keep on continuing  this aeration . Then you add 20 litre of pond water 
or ice water before filtration.  
So, what happens is pond water if you cannot get access to this pond bottom pond soil you 
can simply add the  pond water also that also has suspended enough micro organisms  in 
suspended conditio n. Then you add th is RAS or Recirculatory Aquaculture System  water just 
before the filtration . 
The water is going to the recirculatory aquaculture system  just before it reaches the treatment 
unit before that you take the valve  out and  take like say like 20 -litre of this pond water then you add it with 30 grams of carbon source same jaggery, wheat flour or tapioca flour . Also, 
you add it with 10 grams of probiotic . 
What are the type of probiotic that you can add ? You can add Bacilus speci es, Aspergilus 
speci es, etcetera  with a total concentration of 10 into 10 to the power 9, it is wrong , it is not 
109, it has to be 10 into 10 to the power 9 CFU colony -forming  unit per gram. So, the 
concentration this colony -forming  unit you need to go and  google it , it is very important for 
you to understand what is colony -forming  unit and what is the MPN maximum probable 
number , this is very important biotechnological term that you need to remember.  
So, in general just know this unit that 10 into 10 to th e power nine CFU per gram of Bacilus  
or Aspergilus species you have to supply in with  like an almost 10 gram  in general. So, this 
process , and then follow up step will be the same as the method 1. So, this way either of these 
two methods that you can follo w to initiate the bio-floc formation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:3 7) 
 
See how it works in general , in this bio-floc technology if you see the scheme the feed which 
is reached in carbon and nitrogen is fed to the fish or some of them goes on non -utilized . 
There is non-utilized carbon on some macro bacteria  they work on it and they make carbon 
dioxide out of it and that carbon dioxide goes directly through to the air.  
Some of them they convert it to ammonia , this ammonia will be converted into these nitrates  
by di fferent nitrogen fix ing like different  nitrifying organisms . And then this , from there then 
this nitrogen that can be again utilized by the microbial protein and then this microbial 
protein can be again utilized by the fish . So, this microbial protein if y ou add the carbohydr ate, because nitro gen is available, but 
carbon is not always available and  also some of the carbon portion is actually we get rid of it 
because of the formation of carbon dioxide gas . Because the nitrogen production is not 
available her e, nitrogen producin g mechanism is not  currently available here. Because in 
general for that you need to provide anoxic condition to have this denitrification process.  
That is  why the nitrate is there, ammonia is there. And when you add the carbohydrate, t his 
recycle protein and it will be uti lized as a microbial protein , this microbial protein is utilized 
by fish , this microbial protein is nothing but the bio-floc. So, there they have these nutrients , 
these nutrients  are again utilized by the fish and then  that is  it. So, it is like, this is t he very 
standard practice , standard way of when we discuss about this bio-floc technology . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:2 7) 
 
In general,  this floc volume we can measure it using this Imhoff cone , this is a very standard 
practice by which you ca n measure or you c an just simply do it by yourself also, but in 
general, this is the standard this Imhoff cone that we normally use for the floc volume 
measurement . (Refer Slide Time: 20:45)  
 
So, in terms of evolution and the monitori ng of bio-floc techn ology, it has a hi gh ammonium 
concentration like raise the carbohydrate when like suppose it have all of a sudden,  your bio-
floc has very high ammonium concentration . You always have to treat like every day you 
have to go and  measure al l the essential wate r parameters . 
If you go and read the , if you go and check the water parameters on a certain day and you see 
that there is a high ammonium concentration what you need to do you need to raise the 
carbohydrate level , you have to simply sup ply some sugar , simp ly supply some jag gery or 
wheat flour.  What will happen , it will reduce the protein feed , it will help in reducing the 
overall ammonium concentration . 
This is the troubleshooting manner , just imagine you will not , this is not something bookish 
knowledge th at you are  getting , it is like something like you need to remember because this is 
a real -time scenario that you may face in real life when all of a sudden,  your bio-floc 
technology or if your pond  like the ammonium concentration may go  high. You simply 
supplied with the sugar or different like jaggery.  
Jaggery is nothing but this Gur, you know  it right , in Hindi or Bengali it is called Gur. So, 
this high nitrate concentration check for low oxygen zones  when if its like  nitrate 
concentra tion definitely ther e is a chance of d enitrification is taking place . If it is taking place 
somehow what you need to do you have to place the , you have to accumulate the , you have to  
increase the aerator  efficiency somehow you replace the aerator  or place it properly.  So, tha t your addition wi ll be this, how to say that , it will be increased and because of that the 
presence of this hetero bacteria will be there like not the other sort of microorganisms . And 
then also you can do what , you can do you can just  simply add the suga r. This is like a very 
standard practice if you have any see any discontinuity of operation you just simply add  it 
with sugar that is  the very first thing that you do.  
Low flo c volume you add carbon , very high-power  floc volume you have  to drain some of 
the water . So, stren gth of BFT , the strength of bio-floc technology lies in the cradle to cradle  
concept which in terms  waste in fact does not exist . What is this meaning waste does not 
exist ? Whatever the waste is there in bio-floc techn ology is being utili zed again and agai n. 
Waste nitrogen is generated by the uneaten feed  or excreta  from the cultured organisms is 
converted into proteinaceous feed for the same organism . So, that is  the beauty of bio-floc 
technology . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23 :46) 
 
What are the advantages of it? Higher productivity, it enhances the survival rate, growth 
production , better  feed conversion ratio . It reduces the water pollution , mitigate the risk of 
introduction and spread of pathogens . It reduces the pressure on  the capture fisheri es that is 
the use  of cheaper food fish or trash fish for fish feed formulation. It reduces the utilization of 
protein rich feed or the cost of standard feed. 
It is eco-friendly  sustainable approach. It reduces all kinds of environmenta l impact , almost 
all kinds of environm ental impact . Judicial use of land and water is possible in this kind of 
technology. It is almost limited to zero water discharge systems . And also , it provides  us like 
very high biosecurity . (Refer Slide Time: 24:3 8) 
 
What are the disad vantages  of it?  There must be some , there is always the other side of the 
coin. It increased the energy requirement because of the mixing and aeration that it requires . 
But that can be suppressed that can be somehow that can be  troubles hooted by using 
renewable energy . You  just provide a solar system and provide  a solar compressor lin e. 
Because of that, what will happen , this air compressors  or say like, the air flow valve  and air 
flow pump that can be easily powered by the solar panels , that is it. 
So, it will reduce your energ y requirement or it will become renewable in nature , so it will 
become, it is not a big issue then. It reduced the response time because water respiration rates 
are elevated . Start-up period is required because it need s some amount of  time. So, in general 
it does  not take more than a week or so, but still that is there.  
Alkalinity supplementation is required, sometimes you have to supply it with other sources 
which will help to reduce the , which will help the increase i n the alkalinity  of the system in 
gene ral. Increase the pollution , because in general why, whenever you will be going for some 
process where ammonia is converted into nitrate or nitrite. So, definitely it is alkalinity  
(())(26:02)  scavenging process in general I can say it that way . 
So, we have to supply  it with additional amount of , some how alkalinity supplementation is 
needed. It can increase the pollution potential from nitrate accumulation, but somehow,  we 
can get rid of it as well. Because you can help to grow so me algae because  its algae they love 
to have nitr ate because they get their kind of food, they can be  reutilized.  Inconsistent and 
seasonal performance of seasonal sunlight -expose d systems . So, based on the sunlight, also this bio-floc performance varied b ecaus e of presen ce of 
different hydrot ropic  like different , how to say , these algae  that is also there, which is a major 
part of bio-floc. So, that is  why it also sometimes varied, but it is okay,  it is not a very big of 
a issue, big of a disadvantage to t hink about much rather than the advant ages that we have 
from the  BFT.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27: 10) 
 
What are the further challenges that needs to be addressed is  the selection of proper aerator  
and positioning them in a proper place.  Integration with the exi sting  systems th at we call 
retrofittin g, retrofitting is difficult . Because the existing raceways or polyculture systems are 
there, suppose you want to retrofit it, you want  to change the design, and you need to 
introduce the bio-floc system.  
It is difficu lt, it is little bit difficult. It is not not -doable, it is doable, but it is a little bit 
difficult. But there are a lot of technologies , a lot of research papers are already available, 
experts have already been done . So, it is doable. Identification of m icroo rganisms yielding 
bio-flocs  with beneficial characteristics like say, nutritional quality or biocontrol effects  to be 
used as inoculum for bio -floc technology, because it will help the aquatic species to grow 
much better way.  
Development of monitoring  techniques for floc characteristics a nd the floc composition is 
very important, because at this moment of time, it takes a lot of time . So, we have to develop 
some real -time monitoring techniques, which can characterize the floc and their composition. 
Optimiza tion of the  nutritional content q uality, the amino acid composition, fatty acid composition , vitamin content has to be optimized because most of the cases because it is a 
bio-floc technology . 
It is actually a little bit hard to control the exact nutri tiona l supplemen tation to your aquatic  
species, they can be high someday they can be a little bit low someday, based on different 
environmental factor based on different operational factors that can go a little bit wrong or 
that can because of certain envi ronme nt factor that goes a little bit change.  
So, this optimization is very hard in case of bio-floc technology, but it is doable up to a 
certain limit and that is what being done , that range is being used nowadays . The impact of 
the carbon source type on the bio-floc technology has to be iden tified, it is already been done 
in some of the researches  like if you are  using jaggery instead of jaggery if you put simply 
sugar what will happen . 
So, there are a lot of literature  available on that , like what is the  drastic effect of sugar rather 
than y ou put the jaggery or you can have different other sugar sources also you can just 
simply provide and what will be the effect of that it needs to be discussed , it needs to be 
worked on it like scientists are actually w orkin g on it, bu t there are still some  work required.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29: 53) 
 
Bio-floc technology it will enable the aquaculture grow towards environmentally  friendly 
approach and it provides as a biosecurity.  The consumption of microorganisms in BFT 
reduce s the feed conv ersion ratio and c onsequently cost in  feed.  Microbial community which 
is growing along with this bio -floc, it can utilize the dissolved  nitrogen leached from the stream for the fish es and uneaten feed and convert it into microbial prote in. A nd by this way,  
they can maintain  the water quality.  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:2 5) 
 
So, in general, the bio-floc technology is an environmentally  friendly aquaculture technique 
based on its in-situ microorganism production . And the nutrient in their wate r leads to the 
forma tion of microbial community which maintains the water quality , provides nutrition and 
decreases the feed costs , and also , competes with the pathogens . These are the way that bio-
floc technology can be useful , can be helpful for us . So, that is it for t his module.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 30:56)  
 
So, these are the references that you can follow for understanding more in details about all 
these things that we discussed . So, in general, in the coming lecture, I  will be discussing more about some  more  advanced t echn ology in aquacultu re right now and how we can increase the 
production of aquaculture plus we can have the production of horticulture products also , 
agriculture product also .  
So, that will be called the production of cleaner production i n the coming mo dule.  So, I hope 
you go t to know a lot of very interesting facts and interesting information from this lecture 
material . So, see you in the next module. Thank you . 