Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 40 
Bio-Electrochemical System -based Wastewater Treatment (Contd.)  
Hello, everyone. Welcome to t he fifth lecture material of the module -8, technology of water 
treatment. Here I wi ll be discussing about the bio-electrochemical  system  based wastewater 
treatment , in continuation with last two lectures. My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick; 
I am fro m the department of agricultural and food engineering of IIT Kharagpur . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46)  
 
The concepts that I wi ll be covering in this particular lecture material  are the different forms of 
bio-electrochemical  systems . In continuation with the di scussions that we already have, based on 
the microbial fuel cell , microbial electrochemical cell, microbial electrolysis  cell, and the 
microbial electrosynthesis cell. Here wi ll be discussing more about MDC , MCC and SMFC. 
What is MDC? It i s a Microbial Des alination Cell . From the name itself, we can understand 
desalination means it is a  work  it is a  something related to the desalination of the already saline  
water  right . 
Second one is the Microbial Carbon Capture Cel l, where we a re trying to capture the car bon 
from the atmosphere as much as possible . And it will be , and make it useful for our system to get 
give more yield  in terms of wast ewater treatment, as well as bio -electricity production. Third is the Sediment Microbial Fuel Cell; it i s a very recent te chnology which people are working right 
now all over the world , who are mainly be using the sediment different zones of sediment to be 
act like a bio-electrochemical  systems.  
And it it is named as , it is coined as sediment microbial fuel cell  okay ; so, will be dis cussing 
each one of them in in coming , in this coming in the coming slides . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:01)  
 
To start wit h microbial desalination cell, w hat is the purpose o f it? First of all, suppose you a re 
utilizing saline  water for the product for y our farm  production and all . But, the saline  water 
levels is some you know, it varies a lot; and sometimes suppose  the water levels, see the water 
level is not up to the mark , and the salinity is very high. So in that case, what you can do ? You 
can introdu ce some desalination treatment unit. So , there are a l ot of processes are already there  
established conventi onal processes of desalination.  
And one of them is this you may heard of the RO  system  right , reverse osmosis  and all . Some 
another one is the incin eration ; simpl e is simply , we just simply boil it . And it i s like you boil the 
water , you evaporate the  clean water , you condens e it, and separate it.  All these systems , all 
these  conven tional systems of desalination are energy of taking huge energy up tak ing processes  
okay . So, still there are a lot of research is going on in this field ; and people have come out with 
very advanced RO  processes and all ; very advanced pretreatment  units  for RO processes  and all.  One of these pretreatment unit  to the RO proce sses can be a techn ology  like microbial 
desalination  cell. One of the technology that , one of the another useful application of this 
microbial distillation cell is the application for wastewater treatment. What is happening here ? In 
this reactor, in this  particular type of i n this MD C, which is like the one that is shown here. It is 
three chambered MD C; it can be five chamber ed, it can be seven chamber ed MDC as well  as 
okay . So, in case of three chamber ed MD C, what is happening ? In the middle chamber , in th e 
chamber which is sandwich ed between the anode and the cathode chamber , anodic and the 
catholic chamber, what we are doing?  
We a re introducing the saline water. Once we are  introducing the saline water there, and in the 
left side if you see in the picture in this figure , we have the anode . In the right side we have the 
cathode. In the anode, we have introduced the wastewater ; it actually acts more like a microbial 
fuel cell here, f rom the same concept you can think of it . In the anodic side , we have inocul um, 
we have keep on  provided with the , providing it with wastewater. So , whatever the ingredients 
there in the wastewater , it will consume this biofilm;  and then they will convert it to the electrons 
and protons  and all okay . 
So, what is happening in the c athode , the same way the electrons and pro tons which is come in 
contact with the oxygen , and it will produce H 2O okay . So, what is happening in between ? What 
is happening in between clearly, clearly if you  in the saline water is introduced; a nd we have thi s 
AEM. If you in the left side if you see inste ad of one protonation  membrane in case of microbial 
fuel cell , we have two membranes here; o ne anion exchange membrane, one cation exchange  
member . If you see this orange one, it is like the anion exchange mem brane is the green one is 
the cation exchange  membrane that is introduced . 
Anion exchange  membrane is bifurcating the salination chamber , disalination  chamber , and 
anodic chamber . And the cation exchange membrane bifurcating the; I mean  like separating the  
cathodic chamber and the desalination chamber  okay  understood. Now , when suppose saline  
water . Saline water means what? It i s a salt; salt normally they are t hey are connected with 
anions  and cations; t hey connected to the conduction band  bond  right . So, these anions and 
cations  because of the , because of their diss emination through the dissemination  through this 
chamber in the desalination  chamber ; the anions and cations  are migrated towards the anodic and  
the cathodic side.  So in general, what is a norma l tent? Definitely, anode is  you know  they try to attract the anions.  
So, because of that the anion exchange membrane, through  the anion exchange membrane;  
because anion exchange membrane is it is a selective membrane  right . It will only let the anions  
pass through it. So , that i s why what will happen ? The it is an initial level of sc reening is done in 
an anion exchange membrane; and then this anion comes  into the anionic  chamber. I mean  the 
anodic chamber  and it comes in contact with the anode. The s ame wa y, the cations  pass through 
the cation exchange  membrane ; and it will come in co ntact with the cathodic side , cathodic 
chamber  and all . 
In the cathode, it will get utilized by the termina l electron acce ptor to form the H2  and other 
byproduct. So, what is a ctually happening here ? Because of this migration of di fferent ions in 
different sites, anion and cati on in the different sites;  the water which is coming out of this 
chamber is desalinated . Because , all these salts are dissoluted  and they are they migrate d towards 
the other side of the chamber. Because of that, the desalination efficiency is very high in this 
kind of in this kind of system.  
You understand how it works?  Saline  water is getting desalinated because of the migration of the 
different ions in ei ther side of the of the chamber , anodic and  the cathodic chamber , through 
anion  exchange membrane and the cation exchange membrane. In the anode a nd cathode , we 
have the, it is the same working principle . It is connected with the load , and we can get them in a 
high amount of you know electricity from there , because of the excess amount of ions that is 
present becau se of the introduction of the saline water. So , that i s how it works  okay ; this is 
called microbial desalination  cell. 
In the microbial desalinat ion cell, we can treat the wastewater ; we can decelerate the saline 
water . We can get the bio -electricity  you know , we can ge t the pure water out of it; s o all the 
things that can be , all these things are possible in a single unit  okay . Now , there  because of the 
some limitation in the electrochemistry ; still this system is not at each and every household.  But, 
people are working on i t; and it will be in the very near near future. It will be a very, how to say 
like you know  converted into a technology which can be well utilizable  and well you know  
profitable for the ir manufacturer . 
And also people anyone can they make by themselves ; or they can utilize it in for pilot skill 
applications  okay . So, I wi ll discuss more in details about different configurations.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:18)  
 
The three  cell MD C, we have already discussed ; you know  how three chambered MD C works . 
The anions are bifurcating  into anodic chamber  and the c atholic chamber ; how it looks like you 
see in  the number B in the left bottom . In th e middle one, the middle, t he picture is it i s showing 
the three  chamber air-cathode MDC. What does that mean by air-cathode? T he cathode you see 
the anodic part the yellow one; a nd the we have this anion exchange and  the cation exchange 
membrane . At the e nd we have the cathode, which is in connect with the atmosphere  okay ; 
which is open to atmosphere ; it is one side of it.  
Because of that what is happening ? Because it s one sid e of it is open to atmosphere; t he more 
availability because we do not  have to pr ovide dissolved oxygen . What is happening with the 
problem with the three chamber ed MDC in normal one ? Because they are the cathode ; you need 
to supply it with oxygen  right ; you have to keep on bubbling it with the aerator  and all . So, that 
you will keep o n supplying the dissolved oxygen , so that it will get in contact with the electrons 
and protons coming from the anodic  chamber ; and it will,  it can get reduced to H2 and O2 . 
How ever, in case of air cathode MF C, the efficiency is much higher ; because it can , it is ample 
amount of oxygen is already available in the at mosphere, and it can get easily in control. 
There  are a lot of verdict in it also , like whe ther really air-cathode MFC  is much more efficient 
or not; t here are a lot of paper working. There are a  lot of paper , a lot of researchers are working 
on it; s o, it is still in the verdict.  But, in general , air-cathode MFC is  experimented to be much more efficient than th e three chambered MDC,  considering the energy efficiency and all. Then, 
there comes  the off low  upflow MDC and all. Here  also we have this anodic chamber in the 
middle , and in the desalination  chamber , and the outside ; and this is like catholyte  and the 
cathode will be there in the outside.  
So, here the seawater effluent is coming from its p eripheral site ; and in the middle we have this 
wastewater there . And this wastewater effluent is going through the anodic chamber ; it can treat, 
it is like a modular cha mber  okay . So, it i s a much more design efficient this upflow  type of 
MDC.  
(Refer Slide  Time: 10:28)  
 
Then, there comes  the stack MDC. Remember I told you instead of three chamber , we can have 
five chamber , seven chamber MDC as well. This is one one example of  like that  you know ; 
example o f this kind of five chamber MDC. W e have this series  of  you kn ow AEM, CEM, 
AEM, CEM like anion exchange, cation exchange, anion exchange, cation exchange. In the C 
number C  chamber if you see in the left side ; number C  we introduced the saline  water. So , what 
is this D  chambers are doing ? In the D chambers  is actually  very interesting . In the D chambers,  
either of its size based on the its cathodic  which side  it is. 
Like in the cathodic  near to the cathodic sid e or near to the anodic  side. We ca n recover acid and 
alkaline, alkaline materia l out of it. How w e can do that? It i s as simple as that. Suppose , you a re 
introducing NaCl  okay , you a re introducing NaCl from the chamber C okay . Now  the, what is happening the (chlora) , the Cl negative and Na positive is there? T hey will, they will go to its 
respective s ide based on the cation exchange membrane and anion exchange membrane  that is 
introduced. It will go to the , say like, the sodium ion will come to the through  it will pass through  
the cation exchange membrane ; and it will come to the chamber number D , whic h is in the left 
side. 
In the same way , suppose  because of the anion exchange membrane  which is there and all in left 
side;  suppose the anions are some other cations are, and anions  are, anions  are coming in contact 
with the this Na. A nd what will happen b ecause of that , you will get say sodium hydroxide and 
all. There  is a possibility of generation of the sodium hydroxide  in that chamber. In t he same way 
if you change the direction , if you do like say if you think about the other way around . Because 
of the  anion exchange membrane, it depends upon you actually  okay . 
How you place it?  How  you do your research?  How  you want to put the anion exchange and 
cation exchange in the other way ? So, anyway , suppose you have anion exchange membrane, the 
chlorine the chl oride ion  will pass through it . And suppose from the other side, H plus ion  will 
come in contact with them ; so, you will get the HCl . So, that is there is a possibility of acid and 
alkaline  recovery from this kind  of MDC;  so, that is another advantage . Not only it can treat the 
wastewater, it can desalinate a saline  water ; it can even give you the additional help with the  you 
know  acid and alkaline recover y from the system.  
And fourth, obviously the bio -electricity  okay . In the right side pictures , it is like a stack , it is it 
is like you know  see the stack MDC  with the hydraulically connected MD C. In the continuous 
operation , how it looks like?  (Refer Slide Time: 12:56)  
 
Then , there come this osmotic osmotic  MDC s and all, where it is i t is actually ; this is actually 
more suitable for very high saline water with a very high stronger flux that you ca n apply. It can 
remove up to 60 percent  of the conductivity of the seawater  okay . So, in general , suppose you a re 
supplying 3 0 PPT of seawater, sa line water;  it can give you the removal of almost  it at the end 
the water that will be getting , it will be having 12 PPT or so. So, j ust to give you some rough  
understanding about how this works  okay . 
So, you can , you normally talk about in a electro  conductivi ty this these parameters  and all . In 
case of bipolar MDC  and all , you can  use the bipolar membrane , cation exchange  membrane or 
anion exchange membrane like say yo u know  or bipolar members; s o, which can give you higher 
amount of acid and alkaline production in eith er of th e chamber . You can use the biocathode 
MDC, where in the cathode, even introduced with the aerobic microorganisms. So , this aerobic 
microorganisms which will keep on consuming more amount of  you kno w ; it will , first of all it 
will produce it ; suppo se, you a re introd ucing algae  okay . So, once you introduce  algae in your 
cathode , what will happen ? 
The production , because anyway, you are introducing aeration  right . So, this algae what it  will 
initially what it will do? I t will also produce some additio nal oxygen from there;  and yo u can , it 
can that oxygen can be helpful for your performance to enhance further . So anyway, this is a , 
these are the different types of MDCs those are available.  (Refer Slide Time: 14:27)  
 
There is t his photosynthetic MDC, t his specific type of biocatho de MDC is called this 
photosynthetic MDC , where instead of in the cathode, w e have introduced the algae . This algae 
is actually used, they used as a bio cathode ; and it is actually providing the oxygen , that is 
necessary to be act as a as a terminal  electr on acceptor  okay . Then , this scale -up MDC , if you see 
it is here; we have this same system.  But, you have to introduce , you we have  it is done in a 
larger scale almost 100 liter in volume. So , there are a lot of experiments goi ng on all over the 
world , where pe ople have used much larger sized MDCs as well.  
However, the work is still not in a stage that it you can say it is scalable  like you  know  in the 
maximum size to the best of my k nowledge is not more than 200 li ter. So , it can be if y ou want 
to treat like in a meter cube per day level; t hen, we have to still work on it . And there are people 
working on it , and even you know IIT Kharagpur  also we are working on it.  How  it can be 
scalable? I t can be made scalable , and it can be made useful ; and people can use it in the near 
future.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:39)  
 
Next very interesting t echnology is microbial carbon capture cell okay . In the microbial  carbon 
capture cell, i t has almost a similar functionality like the photosynthetic microbial desalination 
cell. If you r emember the last  slide in the MD C, what we did?  We introduced algae in the 
cathodic chamber. Here also we introduced algae  in the cathodic chamber. T his algae  what it will 
do? It will not only you know  help to increase the level of oxygen in your cathodic  chamber , but 
also it will  consume the carbon dioxide which is genera ted from in the anodic chamber.  
So, it will reduce its carbon footprint further. So, it is utilizing the carbon dioxide which is which 
is getting gener ated in the anaerobic chamber ; I mean anaerobic anodic chamber . So, it will 
consume that carbon dioxide , plus it will reproduce the oxygen;  that oxygen is helpful . And it 
will help you to get rid of any kind of any other any requirement of aerator in your system. So, 
first of all it is acting in a different very like  lot of different ways , by which it is actually 
contributing to reduce the carbon footprint of the system.  
First, the carbon dioxide is getting consumed ; second, the production of oxygen is surp assing 
the; because of that it is eradicating the need of aerator in the cathod ic chamb er okay . I hope you 
understand. So, you have the at the end , this micro this algae  can be extracted ; and then i t can be 
used for production of biodiesel and all. So, it is working and then after the extraction lipid 
extraction is done, that wasted biomass is algal biomass. T he lipid extracted biomass that can be 
used as a forage material  you know  that can be used for to livestock feed and  all. Even  that can be used even i n the an odic chamber itself again as a anodic , the food for the anodic  
microorganisms.  
So, it is like a circular economy we can generate out of it. So , that is the beauty of these new 
technologies that people are wor king all over the world that  it is. We h ave, w e want to make it 
completely you kn ow sustainable the whole system.  
(Refer Slid e Time: 17:53)  
 
Sediment microbial capture carbon capture  cell. In order to start with, remember we have 
discussed ; last slide we have discussed about microbial carbon ca pture  cell. Here what is the 
difference between microbial carbon capture cell and sediment  microbial carbon capture  cell? 
So, in order to understand that, you need to first understand what is sediment microbial fuel cell? 
In the left side if you see this p icture is actually showing the setup , schematic setup of sediment 
microbial fuel cell ; where if you see like  it is like a pond.  
Suppose you have a pond, you know the benthic  zone of  the pond in the bottom; it i s normally 
aerobi c in nature. If you go furthe r at least couple of centimeters below that level ; it will 
definitely it is an anoxic  an anoxic in anoxic zone is  prevailing there. There you can put one 
electrode  okay ; because we know it is like simple example. Like it i s like simply you a re 
replicating the microbial fuel cell  in natural environment. So , you put your what put  one 
electrode in  the in the anodic site  I me an like  then in just a couple of centimeters below the 
surface o f the benthic zone in the pond.  And suppose you put another electrode on t he top of it or near to the surface of the water, where 
there is complete aeration  is provided  you kn ow in the  pond. What  will happen ? Because of the 
change, b ecause of this this different positioning of different electrode ; you will get some 
potential dif ference out of it; t hat potential difference is utilized . And it is not only helpful  like 
you kno w, it is not only  helpful in g etting electricity;  but also it will help you to get rid of a lot of 
different organic matter present in the sediment. It is actu ally somehow helpful , it is because of 
this connection, you a re actually enhancing the organic matter  decomposition in the sedi ment.  
So, because of the presence of because of these electrodes are place d, so the the all the 
electroly tic microorganisms, they  will come in contact with the electrode ; and they will enlarge, 
they will reproduce , and they will become a very thick biofilm  layer on the surface of the anode. 
Because of this thick biofilm , they will consume more amount of organic matter from the 
sedim ents on the nearby vicinity . And because of that, the sediment organic load will be reduced. 
And because of that , they  it is th is kind of system can be used for somehow help you to get rid of 
the like you know the  harmful effect  of the bottom of the benthi c zone of the ponds and all; 
which get  very much . 
How to say like it i s like get a get, get a lot of sediment time to time ; and that can that sho uld be 
utilized, i n order to go for further treatment of the (air).  Because , otherwise , it will again come in 
contact with the water due to some turbulence or something ; and it will keep on polluting the 
water in general. So anyway, so this is the fundamen tals of sediment microbial fuel cell  okay . In 
the same fundamentals, we have replicated in a microbial carbon c apture cell ; and then we call 
them . And in in we call them sediment microbial  carbon capture cell. I n the sediment microbial 
carbon capture cell what we are doing ? 
We have a sediment in the bottom, then we have a layer of you know the  water which is 
comple tely covered , which is completely there are algae ; algae is suspended or present there . 
And this algae what is it doing? First you see the anode  which is present i n the in  the sediment;  
you have the cathode on the top , you have this mixture  which is helpin g the algae to be in 
suspended condition. Then , the carbon dioxide which is getting produced from the system is 
utilized by the algae . And definitely , whatever the  algae present there , they will contribute to the 
oxygen ; which will help to you know to do f or the whole system to work muc h better way.  So, in general it i s a this is this is the kind of a complete  system which we can build , which will 
help to unders tand, involving all the all our understanding on microbial fuel cell , sediment 
microbial fuel cel l, microbial carbon capture cells. And at the end, we can make it as a, we can 
we can coin; we can name it as a sediment microbial carbon capture  cell. What are the benefits? 
Your sediment is getting treated;  your wastewater is getting treated. You can get  algae, and that 
algae can be use d for the biodiesel production.  
This after the biodiesel production  like I mean , after you extract the lipid for the biodiesel 
production ; that lipid extracted biomass has a lot of a lot of applications . Fourth, the 
bioelec tricity generation ; the electricity that it generates, that can be utilized for small low energy 
uptaking  devices. Fifth, t he no (nee)  in there , the reduction in the need of ext ernal sources of 
energy ; because , there is algae. So, y ou do no t have to provid e it with the aeration  to supply with 
the oxygen,  for as it, which can act as a terminal electron acceptor. So, it has a multi facet  you 
know applications and it has a benefit for to be used as a in this kind of treatment unit ; and it is 
very much useful f or aquaculture purposes as well.  
In it has a lot of lot of futuristic application  in aquaculture practices , where people will be using 
in future these kind of systems , to generate electr icity from the pond  itself ; from the pond bottom  
itself that can be re plenished . And the whole pond  can be utilized for generating electricity and 
all. The system is still the  people are still working on it, w e are working on it ; different experts 
from all  over the world wor king on this kind of technology, a nd this is  the fu ture. And I a m 
pretty much hopeful that it will within a couple of years or  so. So, it will become a very ready 
practice for all the farmers like the features all over the world who are working on this kind of 
technology;  who can utilize this kind of techn ology  and all . (Refer Slide Time: 23:57)  
 
So, in so I hope you got to know some very important details about MDC and SMFC  and also 
SMCC. So , these technologies  have a lot of tremendous  amount of application in different 
industry purpose, municipality pur pose; and also you can be utilized in the aquaculture  
wastewater treatment as well. Not only that it can be used for fish processing industry effluent 
treatment, and that electricity can  be utilized for small energy uptaking  devices and all. So , this is 
the end of this module. I hope you got to know some very interesting information about the some  
futuristic technology that is that people are working all over the world . 
And experts are ac tually working all over t he world. How they are doing it? W hat what are, what  
are the fundamentals ; and so that it will, it will make you enthusiastic enough to pursue your 
career on this kind of technology . Or, you can  think about it how we can develop fu rther ; and I 
will be very happy to help you with any extent  okay . (Refer Slide Time: 25:05)  
 
These are the references that you can follow to understand more in details about this technology. 
And I hope you get to know some very important information from this  module on wastewater 
treatment  in aquaculture; and wi ll be seein g you in the coming lecture  in video . Thank you so 
much. 