Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor G ourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 42  
Wastewater Fed Aquaculture  
Hello everyone , welcome to the second lecture of module 9 of the s ubject advanced 
aquaculture technology . My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick;  I am from the 
agriculture and food engineering department of IIT Kharagpur .  
(Refer Slide Time 00:37)  
 
 
So in this lecture material  I will be covering the concepts like wastewater fed aquaculture and 
what is wastewater fed aquaculture , how the aquaculture can be practiced in wastewater , and 
what are the benefits  and what are the pros and cons of it that I will  be discussing in details in this lecture . The type of wastewat er that I will  be discussing also in general for you to 
understand like what are the wastewater constituents that actually involve in this wastewater  
fed aquaculture , what are the types of WFA  based on use , the fertilization , inputs in WFA , 
the product mar ket, vulnerability associated with the WFA  and what are the future scopes 
involved with it .  
So I will  be discussing all these things so  I hope you will be benefited with this knowledge 
like how this wastewater fed  aquaculture has to be practiced and h ow it  is done for a long 
period of time in this Asian  region specifically , anyway so let us  go ahead  with the 
understanding of the wastewater fed  aquaculture .  
In general wastewater fed aquaculture it combines two income generating options , first 
treatment  of wastewat er because you need to feed the wastewater  before throwing it to any 
surface water body say like rivers and lakes and the second is the biomass production . What 
do I mean by the biomass production , it is the production of aquatic species that you are  
cultu ring in that wastewater .  
This aquatic species they will consume the nutrient present in the wastewater  and by means 
of that the wastewater pollutant level will go down but yield will go up the aquaculture yield  
go up , so both ways  it can give us som e benef it. It simultaneously achieves the goals like the 
production of valuable goods like food stuff , animal feed , raw materials , ornamental plants 
and animals , and plus production of utilizable gray water the wastewater purification and the 
hygieni zation  can be  is possible . It is actually utilizable gray  water what do  I mean by the 
gray water do you have any idea what is gray water ?  
So the gray water is actually the water which is coming out from our household other than the 
the our human excreta , other than the human excreta  whatever the  uses of water that we do 
that we use normally in a household say like bathing purpose , cleaning purpose , washing 
purpose , all this together we call them gray water , so this is called the gray water and the 
human excreta  that is the difference that we will  discuss in details in differently .  
So this is the gray water that normally and this gray water constitutes a huge amount of 
chemicals which needs to be replenished , organic matter which needs to be replenished an d it 
is done by this aquaculture species wh ichever you are culturing . So that is possible that is 
doable and that has been done for long and I will  show you how it is done and what are the 
future scopes and how can it be enhance this production capacity th ese thi ngs.  What are the main potential of w astewater fed aquaculture and what are its advantages or 
major advantages over the conventional wastewater treatment is the large diversity of 
marketable products and therefore the broad possibility of income  generatio n other than the 
conventional wastewat er treatment plant .  
(Refer Slide Time: 4:07) 
 
Aquaculture is nowadays is facing different challenges , first optimal stocking depends on the 
biogeographical conditions where like species grow , where and unde r what cir cumstances , 
cultural acceptance which products are suitable and m arketable , economical conditions , 
limited growth rate of microorganism organisms , insufficient knowledge of the factors that 
regulate the aquatic community say the presence of toxic  contamina nts and the undesired 
effects in the wastewater , so all these cha llenges are normally being faced by the wastewater 
fed aquacultures .  
However , appropriate tools can be integrated , appropriate methods can be developed which 
will help us troublesh oot these challenges , like appropriate technical tools like aeration , 
mixing , pumping , special basin farming can be integrated in order to intensify certain 
ecological process and also increase the output of the aquaculture plant .  (Refer Slide Time 05:05 ) 
 
In gen eral the wastewater fed aquaculture it is done from a very lon g period like it is done for 
like long long back ; there are like studies in like even A ztec civilization where they have 
done it in like thousands of years back , however , the innov ative and succ essful way to treat 
and recycle wastewater has to be developed  and contrary to the other methods of biological 
waste water treatment which are primarily used based on the degradation process it is much 
more productive .  
Because in ca se of normally pr imary degradation processes , biological degradation process 
that we follow if you remember in last lecture in last module we have discussed about the 
different type of biological wastewater treatment plant , they use this beneficial 
microor ganisms , they con sume t he wastewater nutrients  and they grow it in their biomass or 
they pro duce some by products like gaseous  by products.   
This biomass is not as productive as in this case that we are using , wastewater based 
aquaculture when we use it , because in that cas e tha t biomass is used as a sludge and it can be 
used as a manure , but the productivity wise , number of income wise this is much more 
productive this wastewater fed aquaculture,  because it is aquaculture product , it has much 
higher nutrit ional benefits , it has much higher expect acceptance range for human 
consumption as well .  
In a constructed aquatic ecosystem when it consists of like one or several water bodies with 
an integrated food web is normally charged with nutrient rich wastewater , the central aim o f 
the system is the assimilation of the dissolved nutrition  into the aquati c biomass like their 
species biomass , it will convert the assimilated into the animal biomass , the species biomass .  Simultaneously , organic compounds are either consumed or mineral ized and in consequence 
the wastewater gets purified , the constructed ecosy stem reflects the processes of the natural 
environment and is thus aesthetically pleasing , this kind of treatment option .  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:24) 
 
 
What are t he type of wastewater  in general is there like ni ghtsoil , what is nightsoil is simply 
human excreta  we call them  nightsoil  when we collect it and we use it for manure  fertilization 
purpose , industrial sewage the wastewater that is coming out of the industr ies major of the 
indust ry say like in our context  we can talk about the food processing industries , 
contaminated surface wat er, urban runoff because of rainfall or because of some urban 
activities car washing , domestic sewage mostly it is coming from , it is like considered as th e gray water that we normal ly discuss here , the septage  it is again the liquid solid mix for 
fractiona te which is available from the septic tank or sea spools .  
So these are the different types of wastewater  you need to understand be fore discussing when 
we discuss about that what abo ut what type of wastewater is fed to your system , so it is better 
to rememb er all this fact .  
Aquaculture systems in general the nutrient contents in the wastewater are used as fertilizer 
which produce the  natural food such as plankton  and benthos  for fish . Wastewater  is not 
directly used by the aquaculture except in overhang pon d latrines , where fish consume the 
human faeces  directly other than that wastewater is not directly utilized by their culture , they 
actually utilized by the planktons and benthos,  and this plankton  population this 
phytoplankton or zooplankton  population th ey are actually being consumed by the fish .  
Organic matter loading rate in stabilization pond like say 200 to 300 kg of BOD 5 per hectare 
per a day is li ke acceptable and and based o n that this is the way we normally use t he load 
that we normally provide  in west water fed aquaculture systems . Organic loading can be like 
as low as 10 to 30 kg of BOD5  per hectare per day when we talk a bout the wastewater fed  
fish culture to be specific , lower organic loading rates we can provide to avoid producing too 
dense of  a concentration of phytoplankton , which can cause the different kind of unwanted 
result like eutrophication .  
The depletion of dissolved  oxygen through  respiration during the night wi ll be prevented , and 
wastewater fed aquaculture often occurs in areas witho ut a supply of relatively unpolluted 
fresh water , so it is also done in the areas like that , ponds for say like fish cu lture are 
normally filled init ially with the contaminated fresh  water or raw sewage with a high 
percentage of organic matter or maybe like  they are doing it slowly for your aquatic species 
to get accustomed to the system .  (Refer Slide Time 10:22)  
 
What are the types of wastewater fed aquaculture based on use; in general the wastewater  
aquaculture can be delineated into two distinct cat egories based on their way of use say like 
direct reuse and indirect reuse.  What is the direct reuse?  Suppose you are  using a planned and 
deliberate wa y the wastewater , you are  using  this as a very planned and deliberate way to be 
used as a nutrient or the water resources for your aquatic species , you are  culturing , you are  
feeding your say like aquatic farm with the wastewater  coming from the nearby vic inity say 
the gray waters or li ke say the industrial wastewater  that will be considered as a direct reuse .  
What is the indirect reuse; without the recognition of its previous use in a water waste 
contaminated and indirectl y enriched with wastewater , it happens sometimes in the regular 
water bodies or regular surface water bodies like rivers , lakes , ponds , etc.  
They are normally in a standard state but however there may be a possibility of indirect 
contamination from any  industry or any nearby municipal ar eas that will be called the i ndirect 
reuse, and that can cause some natural ecosystem to thrive there as  well. In general this 
wastewater aqu aculture is most widespread in A sia around Kolkata  also in India you will find 
it and H anoi in Vietnam also it is very famous .  
In Kolkata  if you know the places in Kolkata  there is a place called Salt lake so behind the 
Salt lake there is Nalban area and all where if there is a very intensive wastewater fed 
aquaculture is practiced there for long period of time and it  is one of the very famous 
example of wastewater fed  aquaculture in this world .  I would really suggest you to go and google about it and try to  learn more about it and it is a 
very interesting phenomena . Allmo st at one point of time almost one third of th e wastewater  
generated from municipal wastewater generated  from Kolkata  are b eing treated in those 
wetland areas and in those wetland  areas what they we re doing they were culturing different 
plants , wetland plants and also their culture in different kind o f fishes there .  
This aquatic species and this culture of this wetland plants are used to kind of treat that 
wastewater,  can you imagine it is like a ve ry natural way of creating the wastewater and at 
the e nd after the treatment is done that water is comin g contact with  the tributaries of Ganges  
and in the surface water body . So that is what is being done there and if you are lucky enough 
you can go there  and you can check it by yourself and it is really int eresting .  
However , the one major problem with thi s kind of treat ment system is that it requires a huge 
land, huge amount of lan d is required , and the  land footprint is very high in this kind of the 
aqua culture practices . So if you see these ponds cover ar ound 3500 hectare in this region and 
with the prod uction of carp tilapia is estimated to be 18, 000 ton per year . It is giving a huge 
benefit to the local fish farmers and the local people are getting a l ot of employability while 
working in this field plus they are getting some nutritional benefits , plus t hey are getting  the 
government is benefited by reducing the treatment cost for  the wastewater that is being 
generated in that area .  
The fish sold throug h the nearby market in central Kolkata  and serving th e not only the poor 
communities but also to the pe ople like in th e nearby vicinities.  So there are some 
psychological concept re garding that come on it is been done in the west which is normally 
the cult ure species they use the wastewater  as a feed so they  must be very bad they must be 
contaminated with a  lot of things this is all works and it is possible even it is not possible at  
the same time , so it is better to always make a track on your the aquatic species that you are 
consuming .  
So in general  so I would suggest like in Kolkata  scenario I am not sur e about it but in genera l 
it is a standard practice that time to time you check the bio mass of the fish and the cultured 
species , so to regularize that if there i s any unwanted chemicals that is bio accumul ated inside 
the fish or not and whether it is actu ally being utilized or c onsumed by the local people or not 
or like it is transportable to the market or not .  
So in general concept it is not at a very high rate , in general we use a lot of other polluted 
products at the every day each and every time even whatever the finest of t he vegetables you are having it might also contain some micro p lastic . So I am not suggesting you to go ahead  
and just have it without any  concern but the concern should not be wide enough that you just 
simply deny to have it , you c an have it actually this  kind of products are very good and it can 
be much more healthi er than in its natural habitat , because of availability of the huge amount 
of nutrient .  
So that is the thing that  I want to discuss and  I really hope you will you will understand that 
my concer n.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:18 ) 
 
In terms of fertilization , primary fertilization the anaerob ic water in the pond is left to stand 
for 10 to 20 days in general . The nat ural biologica l purification processes happen and it 
reduces the  biochemical oxygen demand and increase the dissolved  oxygen to a sufficiently 
high concentration for fish to be stoc ked. As a part of secondary fertilization it is used to 
maintain the pond f ertility and p rovide adequate natural food for your fish .  
The anaerobic water is intermittently added in this small p ond and added more or less 
continuously in case of large ponds . The wastewater may be used to grow fish or aquatic 
plants of your choice o r on the basis  of local availability , aquatic plants may be found in open 
water such as fecal contaminated rivers , lakes, reservoirs or in pond and fish may be enclosed 
in cages in open water bodies or even you can just simply make a proper bund  like struc ture 
and that also is possible and like proper earthen bund  and at the end say like the discharge 
point  you can put the any filtering unit or any a normal cage or net like structure so that your 
culture species will not go away with the eff luent.   (Refer Slide Time: 17:39 ) 
 
So in general when we talk about the wastewa ter fed  aquaculture it is very important to 
discuss about the input s that it involves , so what are the inputs of wastewater fed 
aquaculture ?  
First thing is the seed , in the form of larv a or fingerlings it is usually the only input in the 
system , because a ll the other things are well taken care of by the wastewater that y ou are 
feeding or the wastewater that is there , the aeration,  everything is natural so it can be semi -
intensive or exte nsive but everythin g is natural . In some cases maybe you need to provi de it 
with some secondary fertilizer but it is not mandatory ,  
Although the tilapias may not need to be stocked if self recruitment  is adequate but 
sometimes it is better to p rovide some amount of additiona l fertilization in case of other 
issues and also e ven for tilapia  also depending upon your requirement and  the situati on, the 
scenario . The natural food in the forms of planktons an d benthos produced as a result of the 
fertil ization of wastewater that is t he thing that usually provides the adequate feed f or your 
fish.  
However , a supplementary feed may be added in the mon soon season when natural food is 
limited by dilution , definitel y the rain water intrusion is taking place , increased water 
turbidity becau se of the rainfall because this is the shallow lin es we normally provide shallow 
water bodies  is we normally have this  in this kind of cases the water turbidity getting is 
because o f the water splashing around and water turbi dity, clay turbidity or whateve r it is 
because of the plantary turbidity  it may c ause huge health disadvantages for your culture 
species and also the  lower insulations .  So in all these cases you provide them with  the supplementary feed , so in that case wh at it 
will be called it will be called semi intensive aquaculture systems , you kn ow, it what is 
aquaculture , what is intensive , what is semi intensive , what is extensive ?  
(Refer Slide Time 19:48)  
 
See this i s a picture of taken from east Kolkata  wetland if you see here the sewage w ater 
intake in the first picture and after the sewage  water is collecting come in contact with there 
and then the fishes are harvested there , you see it is like a kind of enclosed s tructure , in this 
enclosed structure becaus e of the net or the bamboo stick s are provided , bombo o nets are 
provided at the at on e end , and the there is a possibility of harvesting of a huge amo unt of 
fishes from this kind of wastewater fed aquaculture . Then you see in the picture d showing 
that the  fish is actually taken to the m arket .  (Refer  Slide Time: 20:32 ) 
 
So now it is a very important thing it is like what do you think about the product market ?  
The food produced i n the wastewater fed aquaculture systems is unlikely to be expo rted 
because o f its relatively low value , there is one problem related to i t; it is not exported i n 
general because of its relatively low market value . I am not talking about nutritional value 
here I am talking about the market value , why it is so , because  of social acc eptance . Still now 
we have this mentality like no if it is fe d by human excreta , it is fed by any contaminated 
water bodies then it is a very bad to have it .  
So just realize other  than what about the ; aquaculture  is just a recent practice it is last 3 0, 40, 
50 year s like intensive aquaculture if  I talk about what happened to  the earlier days, people 
used to have those things it is not something very detrimental . Now it is definitely there a re a 
lot of different type of chemicals coming out which are di fferent kind o f genovatic chemicals 
which are very harmful , which were not there even li ke 10 years , 20 years back also .  
However , still you can believe in it and you can still have it because they have their natural 
way of segregating the unwanted particl es it is same as like we normally when we have food 
we do not  have food whi ch are contam inated which have some insect infestation on all these 
things we try to have only the food that is actual ly we can have it and it is good for our 
healthy being . The sam e way for the aquatic species also do the same mostly and also for 
your aqu atic plants a lso do the same so you can simply have it or you can just get it tested 
sometimes and then you can have i t like it will get rid of all the problems or the psychological  
barrier and y ou can simply have it afterwards .  There are also public healt h considerat ion for people that potential risk  from the use of 
wastewater  in agriculture , wastewater grown food may be  consumed raw cooked and 
processed , however there is an obvious  public health  consideration when you are having it 
raw. Just try to imagin e you are cu lturing it in a polluted condition , you cannot have it raw , 
and you  can have it only after properly cookin g it.  
That is mandatory , that is one of the major thing you ca nnot just have  those fishes , you 
cannot touch them , you cannot have them in  raw conditi ons because that is highly unwanted , 
because there is a chances of different kind of pathogenic microorgan ism in your produce, 
because  it is fed by the wastewaters and w astewater does  contain huge amount of pathogenic 
microorganisms . 
If the con dition is no t prepared in a certain place of your pond and there is a huge amount of 
infestation of different unwanted  microorganisms or pathogens and the fish or any of your 
aquatic species come  in contact with them definitely it is better to not to have it in a raw 
condition or inadequately cooked or process produce , you should go for proper cooking of it 
and then only you can have it properly have it for your consumption purpos e.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:59 ) 
 
See there are  some examples of the wastewater  fed aquacult ure system,  in general the 
wastewater types are given and the delivery systems and aquaculture  system is given in the 
second column , third column is providing us the information about the produced cultured 
organ isms and in the location at the end .  So if y ou see the  nights oil in pond used for culturing fish in China, Indonesia , Vietnam , in 
Bangladesh duckweeds are cultured in  nightsoil , China even in Bangladesh , Indone sia, 
Vietnam they are also using  fish culture in pond with the supply from the contaminate d 
surface water . In w idespread places in Asia they produce some aquatic vegetables stakes in 
water or river or shallow ponds which are sup plied wi th a cont aminated surfac e water, even 
sewage is used to  produce the f ish and duckweed in C hina, Germany , India, Vietnam and 
Bangla desh.  
(Refer Slide Time 25:06)  
 
 
So what is the vulnerability that is associated with the wastewater aquaculture , urbanization ; 
the more the urbani zation is happening the more yo u lose the eff ective land or land footprint . 
So when yo u lose the land foot print definitely you cannot go ahead  with the production of your aquaculture species in wastewater fed condition right , so urbanization  is one of the 
major factors .  
Other than that uncertain wast e resources supply sometimes what happen  suppose you are not 
providing with supplementary feed you do not have provision say just as an example you are 
100 percent  sure that whate ver the wastewater  that is comin g into the pond or into the lan d is 
enough be cause they have enough organic matter , enough constituents th ose minerals for the 
development of aquatic plant or aquatic species , but somehow say at certain moment of time 
there is a ver y less amount of contami nated water is coming into the picture or say  there are 
same amount of water coming b ut it is not as conta minated or pollutant load is not as high 
which can supply enough amount of nutrient for your rear species , what will h appen in  that 
case, simply I am giving you example .  
Even in di urnal basis if  you realize in a municipality area , in a city area when are the time 
when the water uses are maximum , especially in the morning from say 6 , 7 to 9 , 10 am , 
because that time every one goes  to office or to their w ork space so they do their bath ing they 
go fo r their morning calls they do everything  in that time period . So the water which is 
coming out in during that region  I mean the gray water the concentration is much higher like  
I mean not  consideration the amoun t, the quantity is much higher than other tim e of the day 
when is the next time that this surge  can happen  is the evening when people come back from 
their offices and the workplace they took take their shower and that is the  time wh en there is 
another surge, so it will go like this .  
So in the morning  say like 6 to 9 and again in the eveni ng it is like 6 to 9 is the time when 
there is a huge surge of water coming into the picture which does  not contain much of a 
pollutant beca use it is like it is like shower  water mostly , so it does  not contain much of  a 
pollutant load .  
So what will happen  in this case that is actually sometimes detrimental to your aquatic 
expressions because they would not  find enough because if there is not enough contaminated 
water coming  into the picture they will not  be enough for  feeding the plankton  or the benthos 
growth in your system . If the plankton  and benthos  are not growing in your systems definitely  
it will kill your culture , so that is  how it works that is one of the major concerns  in this case .  
Health concerns,  particu larly the field workers or the group or these crop handlers and also 
the local residents and the consumers can be of health concerns  that has to be well taken care 
of, poaching a ctivity because it is a widespre ad area there is a chance like in the night t ime people will come and they will just g o and do netting and  they take all your the rear spaces . 
So you have to  manage proper security of your land also but it is sometimes not p ossible 
because it is a huge lan d, it is not possible in an ind ividual basis it is possible in a 
governmental basis . So you can arrange  some proper security from the government side and 
you can take care of it .  
Inundation due to flood in case of flood wha t happened this water level with  all your reared 
animal can esc ape from your pond,  it can be somewhere else and defini tely it is a drastic al 
calamity for your rearing , changing expectation and the perception of farmer consumer and 
the society , I told you t his customer , customer behavior a nd this perception of the 
psych ological aware ness about the market is very important in case of wastewater  fed 
aquaculture systems .  
So discussing about the future scopes of WFA  or wastewater  fed aquaculture the need for 
impr oved access to knowledge concern ing constraints and also the ob ject opportuni ties for 
operators are very important,  developing effective dessimination  pathway for information and 
improve the collective decision making will ensure the continuous operation .  
It will increase the knowledge about the health risks associat ed with the fa rming , processing , 
and marketing of pro ducts grown in wastewa ter field agriculture would also help reduce the 
associated health risks in general . What are the principal benefits t hat are  associated with the 
wastewater aquaculture ; majorly con sidering the p oor communities are income generation , 
employment , and enhanc e the food security .  
(Refer Slide Time 30:19)  
  
 
So in conclusion the wastewater treatment and reuse schemes throu gh aquaculture could play 
a majo r role in poverty alleviation  programs in urb an areas , even in rural areas and 
waste water reuse contribute s to environmental protection , it can reduce the public health risk , 
it can supply the environmental environmental goo ds and services which often play  an 
important role in poor live lihoods .  
Take away message , development of suitable management plans to con front the reality of 
wastewater aquaculture , mitigating health and environmental risk , conserving nutrient and 
water r esources , safeguarding and stren gthening the livelih oods and food security for the 
neighboring human beings like th e population , it is therefore necessary for the sustainability 
of wastewater fed aquaculture systems .  So I hope you got to know s ome interesting information abou t the wastewater fed 
aquacultur e, how it can be utilized , how it is used , how it has been done  and what a re the pros 
and cons related to it , and how we can troubleshoot all the problems related to it .  
I really suggest you all to go ahead  with this referen ce and also specifically search  in Google 
for wastewater fed  aquaculture systems in Kolkata  to have a bett er picturesque about how it 
is done and it will get a very interesting informations from there  I hope . So if y ou have any 
questions we will discuss in  the live discussion session an d so for now t hank you so much , 
see you in the next lecture .  