Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor G ourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
India n Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 43  
Integrated Farming  
Hello everyone , welcome to the third lecture of module 9 technology of or ganic farming . So 
my name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick, I am from the department of agriculture and 
food engineering of IIT Kharagpur . So in this lecture  I will be di scussing about the integrated 
farming .  
(Refer Slide Time 00:42)  
 
 
The concepts that  I will be covering in general in this particular lecture material is the 
integrated aquaculture farming systems , what are the basic principles of it , and what are the different fish livestock farming systems that is available , how to design and what are t he 
considera tion that is there for when you go for integrated aquaculture farming systems like 
pig-fish culture , duc k-fish culture , other livestock fish cultures , etc.  
In general w hen we discuss about the integrated aquaculture farming systems it is actua lly the 
different sub sy stem which are working in this in an integrated manner . If you see these Venn  
diagrams , aquaculture , agriculture , animal husbandry ; if you see the the overlapping area 
between the aquaculture , agriculture it is a crop aquaculture sy stems what are the examp les it 
can be rice aquaculture systems , it can be rice and say like koi culture in China  it is very 
famous or tilapia culture , there is like agriculture and animal husbandry it is a traditional 
agricultural systems like where we use  agriculture plus animal  husbandry like normal ducks  
to get rid of the pest from your agricultural land .  
We can have the aquacultural Venn  and the animal husbandry Venn  the overlapping portion 
is showing the animal aquaculture systems , majorly the duck an d fish aquaculture syst ems, 
poultry and fish aquaculture systems , there is one in the middle if you see it is the crop 
animal aquaculture system that is  the most productive one where you are  producing crop , 
where  you are  producing animals plus you are  producing aquaculture where  it is possible .  
It is possible  for duck,  fish, rice aquaculture channel it is just to give you an example where 
fishes because for rice it needs a standing water in it and to grow it to grow their rice c rops 
and because of that in the standing water you can have the fish dwelling on it and  also the 
fish excreta  can be utilized as a nutrition for your crop .  
Plus, you can have the ducks growing in the same pond , what will do this duck will also help 
getting rid of the weeds and the pest from your land , and it will help growing each other , it 
will provide the food to each other and this way we can have a multiple production line and 
multiple high economic benefit out of using the same land footprint , you understand the 
point .  
So that is why it is called integrated aquaculture farming system s, so it results in a very high 
productivity because the sum of production is increased .  (Refer Slide Time: 3:45) 
 
What are the basic principles that it adhere s to; first thing is the utilization of synergistic 
effect of interrelated form activities , second thing the conservation in cluding the full 
utilization of farm waste , these two things are possible and these are the basic principles that 
we normally follow when we design any integrated aquacu lture farming practices . It is based 
on the concept given by the FAO,  food and agricult ure organization 1977 and this is a very 
opt sentence if you realize it .  
See it is written they said there is no waste and waste is only a misplaced resource which can 
become a valuable material for another product . You remember  I also told you couple of 
lecture back that for us the wastewater is nothing is wastewater is a waste that is  why you say 
it is a wastewater , but can you realize it is much more beneficial for th ose microorganisms 
which are dwelling there for them which is the food because wastewate r is like their food 
source .  
So for them it is not wastewater for them it is a place it is like they are place to where we can 
have enough amount of food for survival , so for you it is waste for other other person it may 
not for other product or other pri nciples it may not , so this is the concept , so this concept is 
well utilized in integrated forming system .  
The waste that is generated by your aquatic species is a nui sance , you have to treat it 
otherwise it is nuisance for this aquatic species itself , what people are  doing they a re kind of 
utilize this  waste , who can utilize this waste , the plants why , because animal excreta  or this 
fish excreta  or uneaten  feed they ha ve huge amount of nitrogenous compound .  This nitrogenous compound when it converts into the ammonia  and this ammon ia because of 
the presence of nitrifying organisms , nitrifying bacteria nitrosomonas and nitrobacter it 
converted into nitrate . This nitrate nitrogen is a feed for your plant , so they can utilize this 
nitrogen for to convert it into their own biomass and n ot only that they utilize the other 
different organic matter also and so this means they are kind of helping each other .  
Fish is helping the  plant to grow providing the nutrient like unknowingly actually like their 
excreta  are actually being used , again t he fish , how plant is actually being helpful in this case , 
the plant because of the presence of plants because of the presence of the proper environment 
there is a chances of different kind of phytoplanktons which is there , different soil matrices 
are ther e and  different type of insects can grow in its benthic zone , those paste is been utilized 
by the fish .  
So that is  how they are actually hav ing a symbiotic relationship , they are helping each other , 
so that is  why we call it integrated farming is the same wa y it works for duck also . When 
ducks are there  they normally have the unwanted pest and all  from these crops and also they 
help to get rid  of all these weeds from the plant , other than the weeds which they can have it 
and which they normally help when they are dw elling they get rid of the weed infestation as 
well. So if you have this multi -tropic culture  it will get and give you benefits  in a multiple 
way and also you can get higher economic return from your system .  
(Refer Slide Time 07:50)  
  
In general t he aquacultur e which was traditionally developed in an integrated basis mostly in 
the A sian countries  still operates in this way and this  integration involves growing a variety 
of aquatic sp ecies in a single body of water. Water reuse  for successive aquaculture species  or 
other crops , integration of aquaculture with other farm production or byproduct .  
The ponds are fertilized by the faeces  from pig, duck , humans , etc and w hatever is reared and 
used on  the farm,  waste from the crop that is the stubble from the cereal cro ps may be added 
to the pond as food for benthic feeder and the detritivores,  because of that the fish can also 
get higher a mount of nutrient from the pond itself . In some cases the aquaculture animals are 
added to fields where rice is grown partially subme rged in water as  I already discussed .  
What ever the fish livestock farming system , it is a highly assured technology where 
predetermined quantum of livestock waste obtained by rearing the livestock in the pond area 
is applied to the pond to raise the fish c rop without any additional supply of nutrient . Those 
excreta from those livestock is enough or livestock  waste is enough f or your aquatic species , 
so you do not  have to go for further supply of nutrient or feed , can you realize it is the major 
recurring co st in any aquaculture farm  that is  the feed almost 20 to 30 percent even 
sometimes 40 percent of a cost actually caused be cause of the recurring cost involves the feed 
supply .  
You get rid of all these additional economic requirements , the main potential lin kage between 
the livestock and fish production is like constants use of the nutrients particularly the reuse of 
livestoc k manure  for fish production , also they need these nutrients it consists  the nitrogen 
and phosphorus which function as fertilizer for fi sh culture .  Both the production and the processing of livestock generated by product s and that can also 
be used for aqu aculture , so it is like multifacet utilization of this kind of polycultures  and all.   
(Refer Slide Time: 10:19 ) 
 
 
Different type of livestock fish culture systems as an exam ple pig-fish, cattle -fish, duck -fish, 
poultry -fish cultures , etc. so where all th ese animals excreta and all the animal by product s 
are actually used in aquaculture pond , sometimes we design in such a way this pig farms and 
all, there is like the agricultu re farm and just above it you have this pig farm and poultry farm 
and with this k nitting structure , so what will happen their excreta  can directly fall into the 
pond . Although the fish farming is integrated with the husbandry of most of the domesticated 
animals the pig and duck  raising  appear to have the most successful in this regard .  The pond embankment are use ful, used as a rearing for livestock and also production waste 
include the manure , urine and spilled  feed may be used for as a fresh input or be processed  in 
some way before using it for aquacultural practices or aquacultural p roduct .  
One such example is pig-fish culture , you see this if raising pig in a bamboo structure like 
this and they can easily stay there and there is splitter and uneaten feed  will di rectly fall into 
the aquatic pond or the tank just installed beneath it . So what will happen , the fish can easily 
utilize those as  a feed for their survival .  
It has a different several advantages like fish farmers can produce fish without feeding a nd 
hauling manure  to fertilize the pond and pig-fish culture it maximizes the l and use by 
integrating two farm  enterprises in the same area , do you realize that it reduces land footprint 
like anything . Also this fish pond serves as a sanitary disposal place for the animal waste plus 
the backyard  integrated pig-fish culture provides t he additional income and a cheap source of 
animal protein for all the family or the dependent family or for the local market area .  
(Refer Slide Time 12:40)  
 
How to establ ish the system , the pond construction we have to establish the pond near to our 
water source definitely . However , the site should be free from flooding inlet and outlet pipes 
should be installed and screened properly , so that it will not lose any aquatic a nimal . One pig 
can sufficiently fertilize 100 to 150 square meter of pond with it s manure,  based on that you 
have to calculate your number of pigs that you can have in your farm .  
The water depth should be maintained at 60 to 100 centimeter with the recomme nded pond 
area and water depth together with the right stocking density , problems  of organic pollutions are avoided . A diversion canal can be constructed to channel the excess manure into the 
composite pit and when manure  loading needs to be stopped , so th is diversion canal  is very 
important when you are designing this structure for yo ur pig farm .  
The nutrient rich water from the pond can be used for vegetable grown on the pond dike and 
adjacent to the pond  also, because anywhere you have very high enriched  manure  based  
wastewater  in your system .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:55 ) 
 
Location of the pig pen, there are two optional designs  for locating your pig pen or the 
structure where we are actually being cultured . The pen constructed  on the dikes near to the 
fish pond preferably the floor s hould be made of concrete or some impermeable material  to 
catch the pig manure an d urine and floor should slope towards the pond so you can simply 
wash it thoroughly and it will directly go to the pond , there will be some outlet point from 
which it will di rectly go to the pond.   
A pipe is necessary to convey the manure and the urine int o the pond area that is also possible 
or even further reduce the land footprint you can directly design the pig pen over the pond,  
but in this case the floor can be made of ba mboo slats spaced just enough to allow the manure 
and urine to fall directly into  the pond and not too wide for the feet of the pig to slip into and 
which can cause injuries . A pen should have a floor area of around 1 to 1.5  meter per pig, for  
each pig we have to have this area total 1.5 square meter of area .  (Refer Slide T ime: 15:08 ) 
 
 
Stocking  as I already discussed  approximately the stock of pond like 100 to 150 square meter 
with the fingerlings of 200 fish per 100 square meter can be used with the fill up of water and 
stock of pig pen with one weanlin  8 to 10 kg  or 1.5 month of old . Fish and piglets can be 
stocked at the same time , pigs can be fed twice a day , supplemented feed can be given and 
harvesting of fish after 4 to 5  months is possible based on the target species and coll ecting the 
fingerlings  present for the next growing season and the sell of the su rplus and partial 
harvesting for family consumption can also be done as needed .  
So it is a very standard good and old practice for your integrated farming culture . Sell the pig 
after 4 to 5  months  and if possible scrap out the organic waste or mud on the p ond floor and 
use the fertilizer for for growing the vegetable crops in surrounding places .  What are the limitations ? There is high cost of input for pig growing for its feed s and 
weanling,  howev er, this can be minimized if you have a higher return becaus e within 4 to 5 
months you can get a lot of return in terms of economic benefit like the aquatic species plus 
see this pigs you will  get a lot of economic return . The consumer  may be reluctant to eat fish 
because of this muddy flavor produced in manure  loaded pond and creating a potential 
marketing problems , there are a lot of troubleshooting major to get rid of it so that you can 
follow to to get rid of these limitations .  
Farmers want their anima ls close to their homes because of the theft problems and thi s may 
not be always possible . Possible solutions to overcome some of these limitations first is raise 
the crossbr eed or native pigs to reduce the feed cost , stop loading the manure  to the pond a 
few days before harvesting the fish so it will help you to g et rid of this muddy flavor of your 
fish, so it will solve the problem of this potential marketing issues . 
Transfer the harvested fish to a net enclosure installed in a clear pond at at least 4 to 6 hour 
prior to selling or eating them , so it will help hel p them get rid of the muddy  flavor .  
(Refer Slide Time 17:43)  
 
Second example is the duck -fish culture ; raising ducks over fish ponds feeds very well with 
the fish polyc ulture system . The system is advantageous to farmers in many ways , ducks 
fertiliz e the pond by their dropping when given a free range over the pond surface , ducks  
have been termed as manuring  machines for their efficient and labor saving method of pond 
manuring,  results in complete  savings on pond fertilizer and supplementary fish fee d which 
accounts for 60 percent of the total cost in conventional fish culture , you remember we 
discussed about in very beginning of like  I think second or third module .  So that can be completely minim ized if you are  culturing your duck  in your pond . It can also 
keep the water plants in check so that is also good it will not cause any unwanted weed or 
unwanted water plant to grow , so that is also one way good for your systems .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:46 ) 
 
 
So all these factors like this ducks  can loosen the pond bottom with their dabb ling and help in 
release the nutrient from the soil and which will also increase the pond productivity , ducks  
aerate  the water while swimming that is  why ducks  are called b iological aerators,  because 
they aerate  when they are swimming they are increasing t he aeration rate , they are somehow 
creating some turbulence on the surface and because of that the dissolved  oxygen 
concentration can be increased , so it is like a natural biological aerators for your pond so you 
should go ahead  with it so that it will red uce the requirement of your additional aerator.   Duck houses are constructed on pond dike  hence no additional land is required for duckery  
activity ; ducks  get most of their  total feed requirement from the pond in the form of aquatic 
weed , insects , larvae , and earthworms,  so we do not have to worry about their feed . They 
need very little feed and farmers normally give kitchen waste , molasses  and rice bran for this 
purpose , so your problem with the kitchen waste can also be solved , you just provided with 
them and they will be very happy to have them , that is  it.  
You can realize by multiple way your production can be enhanced , multiple way you can 
realize huge amount of profit while  doing this kind of culture practices , rice and fish culture 
practices . Ducks  not only need any elaborate housing since they remain in the pond most of 
the day , but also as  I discussed it can be placed if you have a small amount of duckery you 
can jus t sim ply put it in your dike of your pond,  so that is enough so no additional places 
required .  
Low cost night  shaker mode of bamboo or any cheap material should be available either on 
the pond embankment or on the bottom surface for the ducks , to dwell , the hou se should be 
well ventilated and designed with the washing or draining or so that  the washings are drained 
into the pond .  
About 30 ducks are sufficient to fertilize the point of around thousand square meter , floor 
area around 13 to 14 meter square i s only  required for 3 to 4 month old ducklings are 
normally stocked and a balance feed may be purchased and given at 50 gram per bird per day 
that is  more than enough , if you really want them to survive in a very well condition it is like 
they can be very well su rvived with the kitchen waste and the whatever the earthworms and 
the living orga nisms present in the pond .  
But additionally if you want to grow it much faster you provide it with the 50 gram per bird 
per day  of balance feed.   (Refer Slide Time: 21:36) 
 
What are the other fish livest ock systems , goat and fish livestock systems are available , cattle 
and fish lives tock systems are available , chicken and fish livestock systems are available , so 
this cattle , chicken are also grown in the same farm  in close proximity , it is easy and 
inexpe nsive to utilize their waste materials for fertilizing the pond and chicken manur e is a 
very efficient fertilizer for fish pond , because it constitutes a huge amount of protein and this 
nutritions required for your fis h to grow faster .  
Though only limited  benefits for the chicken is being close to the fish pond , but it is doable 
you c an go ahead  with the culture of goat and fish in the same farm,  this goat excreta  can be 
utilized for your fish culture or you can provid e it into your pond , the chicken dropp ings can 
be added and by this way you can increase enhance the productivity of yo ur system .  (Refer Slide Time 22:43 ) 
 
 
 So the main potential linkages between the livestock and fish production concern  the use of 
nutrient , particularly the reuse of live stock manures for fish production . Other than that what 
are the benefits it will increase the economic yield , economic benefit it will increase the total 
yield , it will help to go for multiple production line in a sam e plant footprint , it will help 
giving some ecological benefit because we do not have to provide it with additional nutr ients , 
additional pest concentration will be reduced , the unwanted weed  can be in in stake so all 
these things is possible when you do for this multi -tropic aquaculture , if you go ahead  with 
this aquaculture practices .  
Both production and the processing o f livestock generate  by products  that can also be used in 
aquaculture . So in all the way it is beneficial , so you just need to design i t properly , you have 
to stock it proper ly and you  have to start your business right now . So do not  worry about it 
you ju st go ahead  with this , it is very beneficial for your entrepreneurship development and it 
does require a very minimal experts opinion , anyone can do that and if you have any i ssues 
the troubleshooting measures are already available in Google if you just go  and search for it 
and you will get ample amount of material for you to develop this kind of practices and if you 
have land just go ahea d and just go start doing it , it will g ive you a huge economic return for 
sure.  
So that is  all about integrated aquacult ure farming . We will continue it further in the coming 
lecture but as  I take away message  I just want to show you this small figure if y ou see this the 
left figure which is se parate and standalone operation and in the right side if you see the 
integration results of similar levels of benefit to both components and which increases the 
overall benefit which means like if you go ahead  with similar, same amount of culture 
practices you can do if you do it separately the benefit , you just see the size of the Venn 
diagram s the benefits will be minimum .  
If you somehow make a symbiotic relationship between these two different farming practices 
it will incre ase the productivity you see the Venn d iagrams size is much higher . It will 
increase the productivity not only that beca use of this integration you will get multiple  
benefits, multiple  economic benefits , productivity benefits , byproduct recovery , ecological 
benefit like  environmental benefits , it will give you a lot of other positive , how to say like in 
a positive gaining out of doing that .  
So that is  why it is very important  I would  really request you all of you to go ahead  and 
search for it muc h if you want to do a more re search if you go and search in Google a nd try to find out different literatures available on it and if you have a land j ust go and start it that is  
the first thing I would say because if you have a land and at this moment if yo u want to start 
creating some  employability opportunity that is the right time and people really do not  follow 
it, but there is a chance of getting h uge benefit out of it .  
So that is it for the day and  I would like to request you to go ahead  with this ref erences if you 
want to know mo re in details about all the details , all the discussions that we have . This FAO,  
this food and agriculture organization their page have more details much more interesting 
informations regarding this integrated aquaculture farm ing practices and in China  it is really 
famous in Southeastern Asia, it is really famous in India  also it is there for long period of 
time, but now  it is time to accelerate it because there is a huge demand but in order to meet 
those demand and in order to  make it in a exportable qu ality the recent generation we should 
go ahead  and we should start practicing all these things .  
It will give us economi c benefit and it is not something to be shame of , this kind of jobs will 
give us food this type of jobs will give us the things that is  required for our living that is food , 
so it is it is nothing to be ashamed of go ahead  and start working on it will giv e you economic 
benefit , it will give you a lot of employability opportunity to your neighboring area and 
defin itely it will give some en vironmental benefit as well if you prop erly culture it .  
So that is it for today's lecture , we will continue with this di scussion in the coming lecture , 
thank you so much .  