Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor G ourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 41  
Organic Aquaculture Standards  
Hello everyone , welcome to the first lecture of module 9 , the technology of organic farming . 
My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick; I a m from the agriculture and food 
engineering  department of IIT Kharagpur .  
(Refer Slide Time 00:36)  
 
  
So in this lecture material what we will be focusing on majorly the organic  agriculture and 
this aquaculture in general . So based on these organic aquaculture  concepts  and all  we will be 
focusing on some basic principles of organic aquaculture , what are those principles ; principle 
of health , principle of ecology , principle of fai rness an d principle of care . So just try to 
remember these are the, this is all the principles that  I am talking about is based is actually 
tells us that whether the culture system that we have used it  is a organic culture systems or the 
normal , the standa rd ones or not .  
So if we consider it such a  as a organic aquaculture it should  rely on, it should  definitely 
follow some basic principles , so in this lecture we will follow, we will try to understand those 
basic principles that we need to follow in order to claim that what we are doing  it is a organic 
aquaculture . So in general, this organic f ish farming is considered as a natural production 
method that combines the eco -friendliness with fish welfare , try to remember whenever we 
talk about organic things  and all  we always talk about the welfare of the culture species or the 
culture crop , whenever we di scuss about organic agriculture it is culture crop , we have to take 
care of the welfare of the culture crop or the related living beings .  
Same way organic aq uaculture also it shows us the basic necessity of fish welfare or the 
aquatic species welfare . Preference and willingness to pay become a crucial relevance when 
asking for market opportunities for organic food and seafood , because sometimes people 
prefer i t however they cannot afford it because if you want to go for complete organic it may 
cost you a li ttle bit more even sometimes little bit less also .  
It all depends on the target area and target species , however this willingness to pay and 
preferences are  crucial relevance when or we talk about the organic aquaculture . Globally aquaculture is actually increasingly having important role in the provision of animal protein 
in human diet and however , aquaculture still increases  the strain on wild aquatic syste ms by 
depleting the feed sources for a wild populations plus polluting the surrounding areas with 
contaminated effluent .  
So these are the reason why we should go ahead  with the organic aquaculture systems and 
why people are started , why researchers have s tarted developing ideas and also the 
aquaculture is mostly they started pruning towards the organic aquaculture . The goal of the 
organic sector is to positively impact the aquaculture production through the establishment of 
ecologically integrated systems that preserve the natural environment as it is , it will maintain 
and enhance the biodiversity if pos sible , it will respect all the related animal welfare and also 
it will yield high quality healthy product , so that is  our motto when we talk about the organ ic 
sector .  
The main aspects of aquaculture practices like first site selection and design , breeding , 
feeding , species health and welfare , and product handling , and quality . Do not manifest 
singly but rather in conjunction with each other and therefore imp inge on multi ple principles 
at the same time,  therefore we should rely on ; it is not that something your cultural  in tilapia  
just you are worrying about tilapia that is  it, somehow you want to culture it , somehow you 
want to make it as much precious  as pos sible so to get higher market benefit , no.  
Organic culture it only shows that  it is not only the tilapia but a ll the related species in that 
ecosystem has to be well taken care of . So it is not a single phenomena , it is a not a single 
target , it is a mult iple species target , multiple principles impringed in a same Venn diagram, 
so that is what we need to do.   (Refer Slide Time 05:03)  
 
 
 Organic systems in general it rooted in four principles , in terms of any organic agriculture it 
may be an organic aqu acult ure, it may be organic agriculture for crop yield . What are the 
fours, w hat are these four principles ; principle of health , fairn ess, ecology and care . We will  
discuss about all these things , what does that mean , what is principle of health means , what is 
principle of fair ness, ecology or care means .  
Principle of health , any organic agriculture it should sustain and enhance the heal th of soil , 
plant , cultured animal , in our case it is fishes , human and the planet as one and indivisible . 
The principle points out that the hea lth of individual and the communities cannot be separated 
from the health of ecosystem . So our main motto is to take care of the health of the whole 
ecosystem .  
Health is a wholeness and integrity of a living system that we should ta ke care of ; immunity 
resilience and the regeneration are the key characteristics of health and the role of organic 
agriculture when we talk about whether in farming , processing , distribution and consumption , 
is to sustain and enhance the health of ecosyste ms and the organisms fr om the smallest in the 
soil to the human beings , so whole ecosystem has to be benefited out of it .  
The second go al is to produce the high quality nutritious food that contributes to preventive 
health care and the well -being in gener al. Thus the use of fert ilizers , pesticides , animal drug , 
food additives that may have adverse health effects should be avoided at the b est. In terms of 
aquaculture the main implication of the principle devolve into the health of the species in 
quotient th rough proper nutrition , second the nutrition quality of the product sold for human 
consumption has also to be taken care of whether it i mplies with the certain standard or not , 
so that is what the principle of health shows us .  
What is the principle of eco logy, organic agricultur e or say organic aquaculture it should be 
based on living ecosystem , its cycle , its work with them and the emula te them and help 
sustain them . Nourishment and well -being are achieved through the ecology of the specific 
production en vironment for fish and m arine organism , it is aquatic environment . Organic 
management must be adapted to local conditions , ecology , culture and scale .  
Inputs should be reduced by reuse , recycling and efficient management of the materials and 
energy in ord er to maintain and improv e the environmental quality and to conserve the 
resources . Organic agriculture it should also attain the ecologi cal balance through the design 
of farming systems , establishment of their habitat , and maintenance of their genetical a nd the 
aquaculture or agr icultural diversity .  (Refer Slide Time 08:09)  
 
In line with the principles , the integration of the product ion system with nature and its 
environmental impact is to be the major concern for us . One of the most controversial issues  
in this organic aqua culture debate has been the recirculation and the reuse of water in organic 
systems whether it is a well led pra ctice of organic way or it is not that is a very standard 
debate .  
Based on that if you see the international federation of  organic agriculture m ovements in 
2017,  they state that organic aquaculture may include an environmentally integrated 
recirculation sys tem only if the primar y, primarily based on and situated in a natural 
environment . They said you cannot do it in a artifi cial environment , you can only  do it, you 
can only go for this environmental integrated recirculation  systems if it is based on and 
situated in a or situated in a natural environment . It does not routinely rely on external inputs 
such as oxygen , allows the  rays of species to spend the majority of their life in outdoor 
facilities and preferably uses renewable energy .  
So once and unless somehow t hey go for all these criteria , they maintain all these criterias 
then only it will be considered as organic aquacu lture systems , so it should no t rely on the 
external inputs like oxygen , so they mostly talk about the semi intensive ones or extensive 
ones. If you want to go for intensive one definitely you cannot follow this rule , so it is very 
hard to follow organic a quaculture practices in intens ive aquaculture system .  
It is doable in semi intensive and extensive and with proper precaution intensive also i t is 
doable , nowadays scientists are trying their best to make it as organic as possible but it comes with becaus e basically you are providing i t with the aeration  and other artificial means you 
cannot just have it in proper organic  way.   
(Refer Slide Time: 10:26 ) 
 
So now we discuss about the principles of health and wellness , let us discuss about the 
principles of fairness . Organic agriculture should build on relationships  that ensure the 
fairness with regard to the common environment and the life opportunities , it is characterized 
by equity , respect , justice and stewardship of the shared world both among the people  and in 
relation of the living being that you are culturing  or rearing.   
This principle further emphasizes that organic agriculture or organ ic aquaculture  should 
conduct  huma n relationships in a manner that ensures fairness at each level whether it be the 
microbiota that is present in your system , whether it be the h uman being that is consuming 
that rearing species , it should provide everyone involved with it a good quality of  life, it will 
contribute to the food sovereignty and reduction of poverty , it sho uld produce sufficient 
supply of good quality food and other f ood by products .  
Animals which are , so what does that mean whatever the animals that you are culturing or 
rearing it should be provided with the conditions and opportunity of life that accord  with their 
physiology , natural behavior and well -being . So this  is being practiced all over the world 
right now , especially the persons with animal concerns they really worrie d about it , we 
should really think about how we can maintain a proper condition an d proper opportunity that 
can be provided for them to live the  way they live naturally , all our rearing species  or culture 
species .  We are consuming it that does not mean we can be as cruel as we want . So this is a very 
important thing  to be when we discu ss about the organic culture , the principle of fairness 
should be maintained .  
(Refer Slide Time 12:20 ) 
 
Fourth one is the principle of care , what do  I mean by principle of care ? Organic agriculture it 
should be managed in a precautionary and the responsi ble manner to protect the health and 
well-being of current and future generation and the env ironment .  
So here we are not only talking about the current generations and current animals in the 
different tr opic level , but also the future generations and the future impact on the 
environment . The practitioners of organic agriculture can enhance the e fficiency and increase 
the productivity , but it should not jeopardize the health and well -being of all the anima ls or 
all the species that involves in the system .  
Consequently , if you are adding any new technology it has to be properly assessed and 
properl y reviewed that whether it can be replaced and for this kind of organic aquaculture 
practices or not . Given the complete understanding of the ecosystem or agricult ure then only 
the care should be taken and this care should be taken when we are introducing in a new 
technology , any retrofitting of any existing technology , whenever we do that we have to put a 
proper ca re on the species that is available what will happe n to any future implications that 
we need to really worry about .  (Refer Slide Time 13:41)  
 
So in general when we discuss about the elements of organic aquaculture , how we go ahead  
with that , what a re the aspects that should be considered when we disc uss about the organic 
aquaculture ? First thing is the system design and location , we have t o avoid the 
contamination of aquatic production operation from the outside sources of pollution , first 
thing , we have to provide adequate isolation from non -organic production systems and 
segregation of products from all through the supply chain .  
We have t o have a proper caution against introducing any exotic species in the host 
environment ; it can drastically chang e the whole ecosystem . So any time when you are 
cultu ring any species  and all of a sudden your culturing started thinking now let us produce 
some exot ic species it will give us much more yield and much more economic benefit , but it 
will completely disrupt the wh ole ecosystem .  
So you have to worry about it bef ore bringing any exotic system to your to any new 
environment or new ecosystem . Control of effl uent and nutrient deposition into the 
environment by the organic system so as to minimize the in negative impact , integration with 
the natural environment should  be practiced , protection of vulnerable wetland ecosystem has 
to be provided ; this wetland ecos ystems are very standard and very natural , so it would be 
better to protect all the available wetlands a nywhere you found just protect it,  its very 
important . It is like a lungs of of our earth , so more the wetland the more it will provide us all 
the healt hy benefits possible .  Earthen ponds  for certain species like liners are not allowed in grow out ponds , so you ha ve 
to provide this earthen ponds  like when you g o for  this organic culture . Reuse of water and 
the maintaining the water quality is very importa nt.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:45 ) 
 
 
When you talk about the conversion of organic aquaculture , we have to have a adequate 
cleaning of existing s ystems prior to u se for the organic production typica lly ranges from 3 to 
12 months , so you cannot just all of a sudden retrofit any existing no n-organic aquaculture 
systems with the organic agricultural systems , because there has to be some practice that you 
need to go ah ead before you are claiming it to be  organic aquaculture .  
What are the practices , first you have to clean the existing systems typically for 3 to 12 hours , 
you have to provide adequate time to establish and verify the organic practices tha t is in place , typically a full life cycle of a targe t species or sometimes a smaller fraction but 
generally not less than two third of the spec ies life that has to be maintained . Adequate 
conversion of the existing non organic stocks before they can be us ed for the organ ic 
breeding and sold as an organic pr oducts typically at least 3 months before allowing for 
building and at least two third of t here the life cycle of the rearing species or a 
correspondingly high percentage of the weight gain for the sole product to be  maintained .  
So the sources and the the  next thing is the sources of stock , breeds  and the breeding , how are 
you going to do that in organic aquaculture , preferably choose the locally adapted species do 
not go for the exotic species , breeding  should be done using the organic stock , seed and 
juvenile in preference to non -organic stocks .  
Prohibition of polyploidy or artificial hybridiz ation or non -manual means of creating any 
monosex populations , prohibition on the use of hormones , and also restrcition  on the 
artificially lengthening the daylight period . All these practices have  to be stopped when you 
talk about the organic agriculture systems . Any manipulation , any physical behavioral 
manipulation is prohibited in organic aquaculture . In case of algae and micr oalgae production 
or restriction  on the  nutritional input to the production system has to be maintained and the 
control of harvest ing methods to ensure the long term system productivity .  
In case of production of molluscs,  restriction  on the nutritional in put to the production system 
as same as  the algae and others , and careful integration of molluscs  with the rest of the 
production environment like appropriate polyculture can be introduced , cultivation locations 
example like the bottom cultiv ation versus t he other scenario has to be properly ta ken care of 
before you are producing molluscs  in organic aquaculture systems .  (Refer Sl ide Time: 18:24 ) 
 
What about th e feeding and nutrition ? Efficient use of feed that is minimized loss to the 
environment definit ely you do not l ose in terms of economically , in terms of chemical lo ss, in 
terms of like nutrient loss . Restriction  on the sources of feed especially for carni vorous 
species  which must rely on significant portion of their diet on the wild fish resources a nd 
hierarchy for  choosing different other sources of food .  
Restricti on on the fish meal and fish oil percentage in the fish diet , you try to get rid of , you 
cannot get rid of it but you try to minimize the percentage of fish oil and fish meal percentage 
in your fish diet  and restriction  of the feed supplements and additive s in accordance with the 
least established given by the standard regulatory bodies , you hav e to follow those rules . 
Possibility to use alternative protein source like microalgae or insect s produced under  organic 
methods can be introduced , so that it will b e used as a feed a nd nutritional source for your 
aquatic rearing animal and also it will he lp you reducing the requirement of fish meal and fish 
oil based nutrition for your fish diet .  (Refer Slide Time  19:42)  
 
In terms of health and welfare , how you c ontrol the health and welfare ? We have to 
emphasize on the cultural practices and the preve ntion , good system design , proper choice of 
species , optimum nutrition supply , minimize the stre ss from problems  related to like stocking 
density , it has to be appro priate to the species that you are culturing , contaminants or swings 
in water conditions ha s to be reduced , and temperature and oxygen level has to be controlled .  
So all this like this op timum level for your culture  species has to be maintained for differe nt 
parameters , so appropriate veterinary treatment is necessary also in case of when you ta lk 
about the welfare definitely and with limits on frequency in order to label  a product as 
organic, this is ver y important like this appropriate veterinary treatmen t that you are  
providing .  
Also this prophylactic uses of veterinary drugs has to be prohib ited as there are like synthetic 
hormones and the growth promoters are there , so that has to be completely stopp ed when you 
talk about the aquaculture like organic a quaculture , routine cleaning on the systems and the 
fallow periods between the production c ycles as appropriate , define proper stocking density 
per species , restriction  on prohibitions on  the mutilations , use of antibiotics which leads to 
decertification of  the treated animal you have to be cautious about  it.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:17 ) 
 
How to harvest , how to transport and  how to slaughter your animal or your target species , 
you have to minimize the stress at pre slaughter level , how we can do that ? You can control 
the environment and  the transport medium as easy as possible for your aquatic species , you 
have to minimize the  suffering during the slaughter by normally using different incen se sets  
like you can put them i n the freezer  slowly reduce the temperature and give them some 
therma l shock and they will be in a or I am just giving you an example .  
You can use a some means  like the natural means by which they will be less suffered durin g 
the slaughter , you have to ma intain a product  quality post slaughter  via proper hygiene and 
the temperatu re control , when you do the processing and the labeling,  adequate segregation 
from non orga nic product to the organic product has to be maintained , transparent traceability 
system in plac e and the restri ction  on additives and the processing aids and the mi nor non 
organic ingredients based on the leads established as a part of the given standard has to be 
maintained . The label  indications in compliance with the standard and other regulatory  
relevant statut es have  to be provided .  (Refer Slide Time 22:42)  
 
 
 So these are all the means that actually there in organic when we talk about the organic  
aquaculture systems and have to maintain all this criter ias and then only you to be called as a  
practice which is organic enough or like standard enough and organic  enough so that people 
who are worried about it , people like us who are working on it and t hey will be more satisfied 
with the practice that is done  and when we will  be consuming it we wi ll feel less gui lty about 
it.  
So in general this is coming from the t he psychological point of view also , so I am sure like 
most of them would not  be much trigg ered about this going for organic aquaculture even 
there  is a chance most of them are , however , this is a very standard, very good practice and in 
future this is actually a very fu turistic model  I would say , like people should follow so to do 
any agriculture or aquacultu re practices in a very as minimum as harm ed to the ecosystem 
like in in a way so that it will ca use as minimal a s harm  to the ecosystem .  
In so in conclusion increas e of aquaculture to volumes of product is due to more intensive 
systems and technological i nnovations in recent decades that have  been done before . These 
newer and high producing systems  are often done w ith practices that are not as clearly and 
wholly comp atible with the principles of organic aquaculture systems . So we have to follow 
those organ ic aquaculture systems and thus the aquac ulture stakeholders have to weigh 
positive and negative  consideration a nd make  compromise in this period of meeting the 
need s, desires and expectation of producers and consumers alike .  
So this has to be maintained  and all this discussion  I hope you have b enefited with the some 
knowledge about what is organic aquacul ture, what is or ganic in general , so these are the 
references that yo u can follow . Thank you so much  I hope you really enjoy this lecture 
matter , because it wil l give you a very brief though  it is not detail enough , but still it be good 
enough information about the organi c aquaculture and organic agriculture in general and how 
you can practice organic aquaculture in your farm , so that it will not cause  any detrim ental 
effect to the surrounding ec osystem and the nearby vicinity . So that is to be taken care o f and  
I hope you  learned a good lesson in this lecture , so hope to co ntinue with this , thank you .  