Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor G ourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 49  
Biofiltration  
Hello everyone, welcome to the fourth lecture of 10th module Technology of Cleaner 
Production . My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick , I am from the Agriculture and 
Food Engineering Department of IIT , Kharagpur. In this lecture material , I will be discussing 
more about the biofiltration, the basic of which we already discussed a l ittle bit in our earlier 
module and earlier  lecture material  as well. So, here I  will be discussing more details about 
what are the different biofiltration procedure that we normally use in aquaculture sector.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:56)  
 
So, the concepts t hat I will be covering in this particular lecture material, the introduction to 
the biofiltration , what are the different types of aerobic biofilter that we normally use, like 
recirculated suspended solid filter, aquatic plant filters, fluidized bed filter s and fixed film 
filters .  
Couple of them you may heard of it, you may already remember the name that we discussed 
in like fluidized bed reactor like trickling  filter, moving bed biofilm reactor, all these things 
you have already learned a little bit, in our earlier model . Here also, I  will be discussing more 
in details about all these technologies even  along with some other variants as well.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:35)  
 
In general, when we talk about the biofiltration what is the basic need of bio filtrati on we all 
know . The first, the water the wastewater that is being generated from our aquaculture 
industry or aquaculture pond or tank needs to be treated , that is  the first thing . So, how are 
you going to treat it ? Then there comes different k inds of biolog ical process .  
We use different type of biological process to treat the wastewater because the wastewater it 
does have different types of carbonaceous and nitrogenous compounds, which can be 
reutilized by the microorganisms.  So, when we use t he microorgani sm or even some type of 
macroorganisms as well based on their type of treatment .  
So, when they are used to treat the wastewater in a particular type of aquaculture pond  and 
all, then we call them biofiltration technique. After  the biofiltration technique,  that wate r can 
either be thrown away in the surface water body, or what you can do , you can again put it 
back to your system . 
So, to throwing away any surface  water  does not make any sense , because in that case, you 
have to take the water out again from t he surface water body tends to supply the fresh water 
to your system. But it is a very specific case , there are some specific cases where you need to 
actually throw away to the surface body  because suppose the water dema nd will be very 
stringent , and so in  that case, you have to throw it to the surface water bodies . 
But most of the cases what we do once the biofiltration is done , so we are 100  percent  sure 
that the pollutant load is much lesser than its actual condition. In that case you can again put it back to your aquaculture tank , you understand right ? So, this is why biofiltration procedure 
comes into the picture . To reduce the water use , to reduce the disease contamination and also 
undesirable environmental impact , the aquaculture industry has shifted its focus to more 
intensive practices with the systems like biofiltration to treat their wastewater.  
One such environmental friendly practice involves the biofiltration to generate the 
wastewater within the recirculating  systems. It can be defined as the a erobic breakdown of 
dissolved nitrogenous fish waste present in the culture media. If you remember correctly, we 
discussed that what are the different types of compound pollutant that can be generated from 
the aqu aculture wastewater , there if you remember,  we d iscuss about different types of 
nitrogenous compounds , majorly ammonia cal nitrogen or ammonia, that is  a major problem.  
Either it is an ammonium ion form or free ammonia cal form,  both the cases ammonium gas 
form, both the cases it is detrimental it is  not acceptable in our because it is much , much 
lethal for your aquatic species  and all. In order to get rid of these issues, so, what we do we 
again use a different module of biofiltration where the biological ma tter like say nitrifying 
bacteria and all  will consume this  ammonia and they will convert it into , in the aerobic 
condition it will convert it into nitrite or nitrate . 
So, this nitrate or nitrite can further be utilized for some different purpose or you ca n have 
another anoxic reactor with or say l ike you know pro per condition for your denitrification to 
take place where denitrifying microorganism they will consume this nitrate and they will 
convert it to dinitrogen gas and it can directly go to the atmosph ere, dissolved  back to the 
atmosphere.  
In general,  the biofiltration can be performed using the biofilter whose major action is to 
culture this microorganism s. How we can culture this microorganism ? We can culture it , we 
can grow it in a suspended growth c ondition , we can grow it in attach ed growth  condition as 
well.  So, just the main mot to of bio filter is to provide a specific environment for promoting 
the growth of these kinds of beneficial microorganisms . (Refer Slide Time: 05:57)  
 
And how they can pro vide it like different kinds of media that they can use . What type of 
media that they can use ? If you see these bio ball s or the bio fills  these are only just a few 
example . If you see this peculiar structure of it, why the structure of it this peculiar st ructure 
with a lot of protrusion or say lik e lot of uneven surf aces. The main reason for it to provide 
maximum specific surface area for your bio fill  to grow on its surface very precisely.  
If you can grow this bio fill  very precisely on its surface, what will happen the more amount 
of bio fill  can be grown. The more the bio fill  the more your treatment efficiency, the more 
the treatment efficiency of your system , that is  it, so that is  why we want to have the media to 
have maximum specific surface area as  much as possible .  
Depending upon the desig n and application bi ofilters perform the following actions majorly 
by biological means, they remove the ammonia , they remove the dissolved organic solids , 
they can remove the nitrites . Physical process , involving physical process we can add the 
oxygen . Wha t do I mean by the p hysical process ?  
It can be either some rotating condition which is an air and water time to time . I will give you 
example in couple of si ze. So, in there the oxygen can be easily attached to t he surface of this 
rotating drums . You can go ahead with the ar tificial aeration procedure , diffused aeration . 
You can supply with aeration . 
Depending upon the type on expectation of your system. Other than that, you can use this 
physical process to remove  the suspended solids , remove the carbon di oxide concentration using different kinds of carbon dioxide scavenger and scavenging reactions, scavenging 
processes . You can use it to remove the excess nitrogen and other dissolved gases as well.  
(Refer Slide Ti me: 07:58)  
 
Typically,  two types of bacter ia or I would say li ke two types of microorganism , active 
microorganisms which are mostly aerobic in nature can colonize this kind of biofilters . What 
are those ? First is heterotrophic bacteria and the second is chemo trophic bacteria. What do I 
mean by the  heterotrophic  bacter ia? 
They use the dissolved  carbonaceous material as food and they can grow almost five times as 
rapidly , more rapidly than the normal chemo trophic bacteria  and that is  why they ca n 
compete with them for space if food is available. So, just realize , suppose  you are having 
providing aeration and perfect environment for both chemotrop hic as well as heterotrophic 
microorganisms to grow , you are providing with ample amount of food also , what do I mean 
by the food , means carbonaceous waste or  nitrogenous waste . 
There is a chance th e heterotrophic microorganisms they will outrun the chemo trophic 
microorganisms because they will generate in much faster way than the chemo trophic 
microorganisms . So, that is why you have to provide it with the prop er culture if you are 
specifically willing to have Nitrosomonas , Nitro spira,  this kind of chemo trophic 
microorganisms . 
Either you can culture it or either you can p rovide this very specific route condition for this 
kind of microorganism to grow in your sys tem. You already know wha t is Nitrosomonas species  works, how it works , it uses the ammonia as a source and of nutrition and it exhibits  
nitrite as a waste product.  Same way Nitro spira or Nitro bacillus,  it uses the nitrite as a food 
and produces nitrate a s a waste product.  
Howeve r, both of these chemotrop hic mechanism mechanisms are relatively slow growing , 
and specifically compared to the heterotrophic microo rganism. So , that can cause some time 
some nuisance and but it depends upon how you make sure that  the expected microorganis ms 
that you want to grow in your system will only grow and the rest  it is not . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:52)  
 
What are the type of aero bic biofilter ? Recirculated suspended solid filter , they are capable of 
removing the carbonaceous biological oxygen demand i n system containing very high 
nutrient loading, it can be utilized in the domestic wastewater treatment plant , it is however 
expensi ve to operate, but do not provide any required effluent water quality for aquaculture. 
So, that is  why we do not normally go  for this kind of recirculated suspended solid filter . 
We can go ahead with the aquatic plant filters, it can be unicellular like th e different kinds of 
specific species the algae species that is possible maybe , you can go ahead w ith a 
multicellular proces s that like especially the microalga e and the macro algae s and all . I think 
in unicellular means  like we can use sometimes some speci fic type of species also we can use 
like I think diatoms  and all  that is also possible, they can a lso be categorized here . 
I am not sure ab out it, maybe they can also be categorized, I really prefer you to google it and 
you will get more detailed idea abou t it if I am wrong in this particular case. So, in general the aquatic plant, the famous example i s aquaponics if you remember that we trea t the 
aquaculture wastewater by it is provided to the aquatic in these agricultural crops  which are 
hydroponically st ructured or like vertical  structured or like horizontal  structure.  
So, it may be a nutrient film t echnique, it maybe deep -water  culture. So  anyway, you  are 
providing the wastewater generating from your aquaculture pond or the tank to the 
agricultural crops , these different types of hydroponic crop . This hydroponic crop what they  
are doing, they  are filtering out . How they are filtering out ? They are removing the nitrates, 
they can easily remove the nitr ates from the systems and by this way they can reduce t he 
pollutant load of the whole system . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:23)  
 
You can find out the fluidized bed filters, if you remember, I think you  definitely have seen 
the sand filters, that due to the presence of the sand grains, these filters facilitate much gr eater 
biologically active surface area to volume ratio for the bio  film to grow much higher than a ny 
other biofilters .  
It also allows the self-cleaning  operation , you just simply do the back flushing , sometimes we 
call them back washing, if you do this ba ck flushing or backwashing you can easily clean this 
kind of sand filters  and all . It has a very h igh tolerance level at different nutrient loading . 
What are the disadvantages of it ?  
Major disadvantages are the requirement of relatively high operational e nergy and also the 
need for regulation of water flow to promote or to prevent the blowing of sand out of the tank is possible and the problem in ma intaining the uniform water flow through the system , 
because what will happen , with time the clogging will oc cur and because of this clogging the 
water flo w rate will become much less than its actual or set limit.  
So, these kinds of problems are there. So , other than that the sand  filters  are very famous, it 
used to be very famous but now there are much better al ternatives coming out , it is already in 
the market.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:47)  
 
What are the other  type of filter ? Like bead filters , especially li ke in general  it consists of this 
closed vessel as you can see , partially filled with a small plastic beads. It can trap the 
majority of the large suspended solids. Due to its very good surface to volume rat io, the beads 
can support a very high amount of biofilm  on its surface.  
And also, it facilitates the removal of suspended solids by mechanically agitating th e beads 
using a propeller to dislodge the suspended solids.  So, what is happening, suppose the bea ds 
are keep on collecting the suspended solids th en after a while because of this agitation that 
you are providing, after a while when suspended solids  make e nough , they make a clock like 
structure , they bundle with each other , at the end they settle down because of the gravitational 
force . And which is settled down in the bottom and then that you can easily collect . 
What are the disadvantages of it ? The majorl y it has a relatively high energy requirement. 
And because the energy , why it is required because the water levels the change in water level and be cause of the water head that it keep on increase , you know water head right , it is the 
kind of resistance tha t you  are providing when they  are in the conduit channel.  
So, in this kind of , it is just kind of channel  only,  you are providing the wastewater yo u want 
it to be cleaned because of the waters or because of the sand surfaces and because they will 
keep on a ccumulating the biofilm  and because of that it will keep on increasing the clog 
level . The more it  will increase the clog  it will,  what will happen ?  
The water which is the flow rate will dissipate , flow rate will be very reduced like anything 
and because of that , not only that it will to maintain that flow rate  you have to apply more and 
more pressure  and which will put the pressure on your pump and  at the end your energy 
requirement will be much higher . 
Frequent removal of solids can dislodge the biofilm  thus disruption in the nitrification 
process. So, not only you know , the problem is you know the n itrification microorganisms it 
needs a little bit  higher amount of time for their growth , for their maturity to attain . However, 
because of the continuous agi tation that we are providing in this kind of system, maybe the 
biofilm  will not get enough chance to grow on its surface on this bio medias.  
And ev en before that only it gets slugged off. That is possible and that along with the 
suspended solids it will sl ogged off and it will be collected in the bottom of the sediment this 
kind of chamber . At the end it is a loss for us , is not it, because your perf ormance will be 
drastically reduced in this kind of cases . So, that is  how this bea d filter was and these are  the 
disadvantages related to it.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:42)  
 
 
Another disadvantages of it like is the presence of large amount of carbon aceous  solid, it 
encourages the growth of heterotrophic bacteria rather than the autotropic bacteria or the 
chemotrop hic microorganisms that we normally expect . Heterotrophic bacteria what they do , 
they sometimes ac tually reduce the carbonaceous compound in a high amount in a very huge 
amount. However, they  are not as useful as the other autotropic microorganisms.  
Anyway , so, that is one of the major drawback of this kind of systems , we can make it in our 
favor also using different other types of treatment of wastew ater rather than aquaculture  
where there is a huge amount of carbon aceous  what matters like say BOD  COD level is very 
high, you can use this kind of systems which will promote the growth of the heterotrophi c microorganisms and which will consume the COD and BOD  and give you a very less 
polluted water.  
So, that is  how we can play, once we know the system we can p lay it with like anything . 
Fourth one is a fixed film,  it can also be like rotating biological con tactor like , have you seen 
the rotating biological  contactor , it looks like this , if you see this structure is this rotating 
biological cont actor it keeps on rotating there is like a continuous this rotating drum , this is 
actually kind of drum like structu re. 
So, whole drum is actually kind of moving an d it has this different disc like rotating like 
circular disc attached to it. And in between these discs , if y ou see the figure  in the middle, 
where there is air and the fixed biofilm  which is keep on growing  on its surface of this disc. 
And because of tha t what will happen this biofilm  it will consume the organics , it will take 
the oxygen and it will consume the ammonia and it will convert it to nitrate oxidized product 
and carbon dioxide . 
Because of the cont inuous flow of air , because oxygen trans fer is very easy , because 40 to 60, 
30 to 35  percent  of it is in submerge d condition and almost 60 to 65  percent  of it is outside in 
the air and when it is moving it comes in contact with a much more amount of atmosp heric 
oxygen . And which will help it to treat much more better.  
So, once the treatment is done, you see it is like it will take some moment of time , it is inside 
the water , it will consume all the nutrients present in the wastewater or like pollutant prese nt 
in the wastewater , they consume it at the end they,  at the end if you see one side the pre 
heated water inlet and the other side the water treated water in let. So, by this way, you can 
treat the wastewater like anything. So, this is called rotating biol ogical cont actor . 
It looks like a drum , it will keep you can keep on moving it using a particular type of like 
system and also you can provide the media suppo rt. So, t hrough the shaft the motor system 
you can keep on rotating it and it will help you , it looks like , just to give you one idea about 
how it  looks like so that it will be better for us to discuss. It requires a very minimal 
operational energy to oper ate because you just need to have a one motor which will keep on 
rotating . 
It can be located withi n the culture tank and it can save the space and  it does  not require 
much of a supply of the additional oxygen because it will anyway come in contact with atmospheric oxygen and there is a  dissolved oxygen , the oxygen transfer  can easily happen . It 
can fac ilitate the removal of dissolved ammonia or BOD  depending upon the nutrient load . It 
is biologically very robust and it can handle the shock loads as well . 
I think you know what is shock load , shock load means when suppose at a very particular 
time of , suppose you  are designing your system for 1 00 milli gram per liter of COD and say 
like 60 milligram per liter of BOD , but all of a sudden at a particular day supp ose your 
system will receive like say 400 milligram per liter of COD and 300 milligram per liter o f 
BOD  because of certain less amount of water th e more condensed I mean say  more dense 
wastewater come to the picture.  
This kind of systems are robust enough to tackle these kind of situations, but sometimes what 
happened we sometimes some type of bioreact ors are very sensitive, if it experience this k ind 
of shock load it may completely disrupt its functionality . So, that is how this biological 
rotating contactor are the  better version of all the other biological reactors that we normally 
have . It also supp orts the visual monitoring of the biofilm  grow th. 
You can literally you can see it in your naked eye that how much of our biological growth I 
mean like the biofilm  are actually growing on its surface because you can just simply go there 
and you can see by your naked eye . Whereas in case of other types  of systems suppose you  
are having trickling filter , you are having any other type of sand filter,  there unless until you 
make it completely transparent glass structure which is very difficult because it is a huge 
media and it has very high . 
It has its own  volume and weight and because of that you cannot just have it in a plexiglass 
structure or any oth er glass which is transparent in nature . You have to provide it with a 
continuous like either FRP fiber reinfor ced plastic structure or proper metallic body . But in 
this case,  you can literally see them . (Refer Slide Time: 22:15)  
 
 
Another technology is  like the trickling filter I am not going to details much because I hope 
you remember what we discussed about t rickling filter in during our discussion on th e 
wastewater treatment in earlier module, where we discussed like trickling filter is a type of 
attach growth , remember it is an attach growth process . 
What is happening in case of trickling filter , there is th is spray zone,  the nozzles are there 
which are  keep on spraying its wastewater over the bio media . In the bio media , this I mean 
like this media what is happening in the media there this biofilm  they keep on growing 
because of perfect ambience , perfect atmosphere  and all. And at the bottom and through this me dia there are different amount of biofilm  it is growing 
on its surface and its biofilm  will keep on consuming the nutrient present in the wastewater 
and at the end the water will come and settle down and that water can be taken out in the 
collecting basin through the collecting basins. That is  how this type of trickling filter works if 
you remem ber. We discussed about its design also if you remember . 
And so that is  why I am  not going into much of a detai l. So, in general trickling filter is a 
system where w e use typically it consists of the media restricted within a container which 
acts as a subs trate for biofilm  growth  and wastewater is sprayed over the media and it is quite 
sturdy and easy to operate an d can treat very high range of nutrient load , that is a ctually very 
good and also it can handle the solid if you provide make a  proper design . 
And not only that, the discharge effluent is much more aerated  than the incoming water 
because it is like sprayed . So, when it is sprayed, what will happen it gets much  higher 
amount of surface area to exchange the oxygen through the air when it is sprayed f rom the 
nozzle . And  the nozzle is like, it is like there is a pivot and from the pivot  it is like keep on 
movin g like this , it is like in a circular or I mean like th e clockwise or anti clockwise manner 
and there will be nozzles , in nozzles the waste water is sprayed over the surface.  
That is  how it is done . And it can effectively remove the carbon dioxide, hydrogen  sulfide, 
nitrogen and other undesirable volatile gases  due to the presence of a large air -water interface 
that is also something very good. One of the biggest disadvantages like high cost of operation 
and the  very large footprint that it requires .  
So, bu t there are technologies which actually kind of surpass  this one and we have a much 
better trickling filter.  And we have some other technologies also which can also be used as an 
alternat e to the traditional  tricking filter process . (Refer Slide Time: 24: 47) 
 
 
Submerged filter like extensively used in the small-scale  aquaculture as well as the backyard 
water feature systems. It is actually usual ly operated in down flow, up flow, or crossflow 
situation . They are structured media to support the biofilm  grow th by providing a large 
surface area . It can operate in  the presence or absence of aeration .  
And modern submerged bed filters are very efficient  and they can be easily to build and 
maintain and very low head loss. Low head loss means it needs less resista nce for water to 
flow through it. And the filter it can be easily installed typically in the configuration similar  
to that of raceway . How it looks like , it looks like this . If you see this triple run submerge d 
biofilter in the left , inlet this submerge d biofilter this like submerge d protruded structure i s 
there , those structures are actually used to grow the biofilm . And then when the water i s moving through it and what will happen the wastewater , I mean  
like the pollutant present in the wastewater it will  get consumed by those microorganisms and 
at the e nd it will go and once it  go out of the outlet it will be very much fresh I mean like very  
much less of a polluted can be called . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:21)  
 
In conclusion what you understand like what are the biofiltration techniques that we can use 
in ou r aquaculture farm . The major biofiltration unit that we discussed is mostly either the 
submerged one or like the rotating biological cont actor ones. So, whatever it is like , their 
major function is to cult ure the microorganisms and to provide an environm ent to promote 
their sustainable growth .  
And this rotating all the other systems that we d iscuss they are very much robust in nature 
and they can handle a wide range of nutrients. However, it would be bette r to have , if you 
expected we have a shock load i t would be better to have a rotating biological cont actor  and 
all. (Refer Slide Time: 26:5 8) 
 
What are the major takeaways from this lecture is like we know that aerobic microorganisms 
like heterotrophic  or chemo trophic microorganisms , they can colonize biofilt er. However, 
which one is kinda outrun the other when th ere is a perfect amount of nutrients available, it is 
hetero trophic  one, they can easily outrun  the chemot rophic microorganisms if there is much  
more amount of carbonaceous nutrient or say like , it is like it  will get enough amount of 
atmosphere like  a favorable atmosphere for them to grow.  
In that case, we need to do some troubleshooting if you really want specific type of 
chemotrop hic microorgan isms to be there like say a Nitro bacter  or Nitrosomonas , we need it. 
So, in that case, what we do we need to provide them with the exact situation or in some 
cases we may even inoculate  it. What do I mean by the inoculate ? We can supply this 
microorganism , some of it from the existing source . 
These trickling filters  it contains the media which is restricted wi thin the container which also 
acts as a better subst rate for the biofilm growth . We also had discussed in earlier module 
about the moving bed biofilm  reactor , about membrane bioreactor, these are also some of the 
biofiltration techniques which are very fam ous. 
But membrane bioreactor is not actually a biofiltration technique , it is more like it is 
biofiltration plus mechanical filtration technique becau se we  will be introduced some 
physical filtration techniques sorry because we will be introduced one membr ane artificial 
membrane of say like microporous , Nano porous , Nano or ultra-porous  like ultra-filtration  technique , ultra-filtration membrane , nanofil tration membrane or the microfiltration 
membrane . 
If the filtrati on technique is much more fine like we go for in angstrom level then we call 
them reverse osmosis . In that case we have the pressure requirement is much higher and the 
energy requirement  is also very much higher.  But in that case the water that we  will be 
getting is completely pure water even it is like completely void of any kind of microorganism 
possible.  
And even sometimes when  it will get rid of all the maximum portion of the ions if it is like a 
very high quality RO membrane . It can even help you to g et rid of all kinds of ions presence 
in your system , in your water , in your final filtrate . So, I hope you got to know some idea 
about the biofiltration technique, how it works  and all . I hop e it is very much helpful for you 
to have some idea about how these diffe rent filtration  techniques we use  it in aquaculture 
industry.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:48)  
 
These are the references that you can follow . You can take a picture or you can just simply g o 
and google it , it will be much gave you a much better idea and more inf ormation about how 
to go ahead. S o that is it for today. I hope this lecture actually helped you out with 
understanding much better about the biofiltration  techniques. Nice to see  you. I hope to see 
you again . Thank you.  