Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology  Kharagpur  
Lecture 47   
Smart Aquaponic System  
Hello everyone, welcome to the second lecture of module 10 technology  of cleaner 
produc tion. My name is Professor Gourav Dha r Bhowmick,  I am from the Agricultural and 
Food Engineering  Department of IIT , Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:39)  
 
So, in this lecture material, I will  be discussing about the introduction to the tr aditional 
aquaponic systems, the types of aquaponic systems, what is smart aquaponic systems and its 
components ? And what are the challenges that we can face in smart aquaponic systems ? And 
what are the advantages of going ahead with this kind of sustainab le aquaculture  units. (Refer Slide Time: 00:58)  
 
Aquaponics as we discussed if you remember in the last lecture also that it is a sustainable 
farming system that combines with a quaculture with hydroponics , plant cultivation without 
soil together into a control unit . It involves in a closed loop recycling of fresh water between 
the cultured fish and the plant .  
And also in this method the waste that is generated from your aquaculture tank can be 
converted into the beneficial microorganisms and these n utrients are then utilized by the, 
these  nutrients like they can be utilized  by your plan t of your hydroponic system for their 
survival . During this process cultivated plants act as a biofilter they clean the generated 
wastewater followed by its recir culat ion into the fish tank . (Refer Slide Time: 01:46)  
 
So, if you  see this picture the fish feed you are  providing with the fish feed some of them the 
fish they eat it and some of them they like  in some of the fish feed that goes uneaten , solid it 
generates the solid waste or organic waste from the excreta of the fish . 
What happens then ? Then ammonia nitrogen like because of the solid waste this organic 
nitrogen  convert into the  ammonia nitrogen in general then this ammonia nitrogen is 
conve rted into the nitrate nitrogen and nitrite nitrogen then nitrate nitrogen because of the 
nitrifying or different nitrifying bacteria then this nitrogen is cons umed by the plant .  
And then it  uses this nutrient uptake in the form of nitrate in general then, it again excess 
nutrie nt can be utilized by the fish also like it is or mostly we almost get rid of all the 
nutrients from the plant mostly it happens if you design it perfectly and then the water will go 
back to your aquaculture tank.  
So, this microbes can u tilize this nitrate  and if that somehow it can provide it with the anoxic 
condition that denitri fies can also grow and it will consume this nitrate and it will convert it 
to the atmospheric nitr ogen or nitrogen dioxide . So, this atmosphere nitrogen  it will  go away 
it will go  and even like it will dissolve back to th e atmosphere.   
How does nitrification works , if you see the Nitrosomona s it acts on this ammoniacal  
nitrogen and then it converts into the ammonium ion and it will convert into the nitrite and 
this nitrite can be c onverted into the nitrate in the presence of nitrobacter . So Nitrosomonas 
and nitrobacter are the nitrifying microorganisms or nitrifying bacteria which are responsible for the conversion of ammonia to ammonia nitrogen to nitrate , nitrate nitrogen and this  nitrate 
nitrogen is being then  being utilized by the plant in general.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:40)  
 
In general,  the in this kind of aquaponic systems mostly water is act as a medium right here, 
we do not  talk about soil because t here is a soilless agricult ure system. So , we talked about 
like water in general because water is the one which is the major factor here and which is 
actually c ontributing to all, it is actually supplying all the nutrient s from one place to another .  
So, t he water quality is very im portant criteria like also like very important criteria for 
designing aquaponic systems . Optimal water quality parameters in an aquaponic systems if I 
talk about so, this is just a glimpse or just to give you one idea  about what can be the range of 
water quality parameters in your aquaponic systems.  
It is not always true you can have some slight variations depending upon your culture you 
need depending upon your design. So like the pH can be 6.5 to 7 , Water T emperatu re 17 to 
30 degrees Celsius to Water Co nductivity 100 to  2000 Micro Siemens  per centimeter , 
Dissolved oxygen more than 4  milligram per liter or PPM . 
Water H ardness 50 to 150 milligram  per lite r of calcium carbonate same as Alkalinity, total 
Ammonia N itrogen  can should be less than 2 milligram p er liter, Nitrite definitely should be 
less than 1  milligram per liter because it is very toxic for your any aquatic speci es, Nitrate can 
be 5200 PPM flow 1 to 2  liter per minute is optimal air temperature 18 to 30 def initely should 
not go more than that d efinitely there will be a temperature .  There should be not m uch of a temperature variance, Relative H umidity 60 to 80  percent  
carbon dioxide  340 PPM to around 1300 PPM . 340 PPM  is around like almost in general in 
standard condition air does have a nd it c an go up to 1300 PPM . So, still people are working 
in different organization research laboratories, how the increased carbon dioxide level can 
affect your plant  production.  
So, in general up to a certain increment  in the carbon dioxide is actually beneficia l sometimes 
for your plant, but it is also still debatable, like there are a couple of researchers they claim 
so, but there  are a couple of researchers no t the same way . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:12)  
 
What are the p roblems with each systems and how it can be , like kind  a reduce the salt or the 
troubleshooting in case of Aquaponics . In aquaculture , the rearing  tank water has to be 
discharged at 10 to 20  percent  of total volume per day it can go up to 50  percent  so, it is like 
intensive aquaculture systems . The discharge of water becomes , the discharge water it 
becomes a pollutant.  
So, you have to treat it and then only you can throw it back. In case of hydroponics the 
commercial fertilizers are expensive , solution has to be replaced periodically disposal and 
runoff i s problematic nutrient conc entration pH and electronic, electrical conductivity all 
have to be monitored , adjusted , and controlled and recirculating  systems sometimes prone to 
diseases . All these problems can be troubleshoot ed by using aquaponic syste ms beca use in 
case of aquaponic systems like we can have we can reduce the  water consumption . Because the water is getting circulated back to the systems we do not  have to worry about a 
discharge water because an yway it is circulating back . Commercial , instead of commercial 
fertilizer you are  using aquaponic solutions, the disposable runoff is not a big issue  then 
solution do not have to be replaced because anyway there is no solution that we are  applyi ng 
in general .  
Nutrient the monitoring this different unit is anyway it is necessary in case of aquaponics also 
and somehow it can it can also reduce the overall disease  related issues in case of Aquaponic 
systems . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:54)  
 
So, to start  with, I want you guys to understand the histo ry of aqu aponic s ystems , it is not 
something that we developed 5  years 10 years back . The earliest example in lowland Maya 
followed by the Aztecs who raised we have found out like different pictures and hologra phic 
and then images  and all where we found out  images and archaeological evidences where it 
was… we are actually sure about the presence of this aquaponic  systems is as long as 1000 
A.D. And no domain  you know it right.  
So it is like in plants on the rafts and the surface of the lake actually they grow this a ny of 
these plants and all they know that if the plants are grown in raft in a surface of water body, 
what will happen ? Is it will consume the waste , it will consume the nutr ients from the water 
itself . And not only that, it will reduce the water  contamina nt load  in your water body.  So plants can and though  anim als also can survive much easily . They call this islands this 
Aztec civilization we call th is an island this Chinampas , it is a system co nsidered by some of 
the first form of aquaponics for agricultu ral use . It normally it is a network of canals or 
stationary artificial islands, which are used to cultivate crops using nutrient rich mud and the 
water from the canal.  
So normally  the plants were raised in a stationary and sometim es movable in this early 
Chinamp as and in the lake and shallow lakes and so on this nutrient rich waste materials 
dredged from the Chinampas  canals and the surrounding cities were then used f or m anually 
irrigate the plants above . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:34)  
 
Development of modern a quapo nics if I t alk about the credit can go to New A lchemy 
Institute and the works of Dr. Mark McMurtry  of North Carolina State University USA. So in 
1969, John an d Nancy  Todd and William Mclarney, they founded this New A lchemy 
Institute and they foun d out  they design a very famous prototype of Bio shelter, we call them  
Ark. 
This Ark is a B io shelter why he called Bio shelter ? It will provide all the necessary needs fo r 
year round needs for a family of 4  using the holistic methods to provide fish, vegetable s and  
shelter, they use a  solar powered self-sufficient  Bio shelter designed for accommodation of at 
least 1  family like for a family of 4  for a whole year.  And this standard model is like the re they have introduced this aqu aponic systems in there , 
they us e the  aquac ulture wastewater to treat to  utilize for your crop like , for their nutrient 
purpose . In the mid 1980s, this McMurtry and the P rofessor Doug Sanders, they created the 
first known closed loop aquaponic  systems that we normally use now  a days.  
(Refer S lide Time: 10:57)  
 
So, after knowing all the historical evidences and all let us  go ahead with the type of 
aquaponic systems that are normally c ultured there ar e like  10s of others, but we normal ly 
discuss about the major 3, the media bas ed or grow b ed or  particulate bed method.  
It involves the growing of plant in a large container filled with particles  like in a gravels and 
the perlite an all  and it needs very f ewer componen ts and this plants when  you provide the 
what will happen it normally it invol ves t he disintegration of the solid waste through the 
media without requiring any additional buffer filter ? 
It also facilitates the limited plant growth though howeve r, it is possible and it is being 
drastically  it is being like very much famous in all of our w orld in different purposes and this 
media are actually used for growing hydroponically, this plants and also the wastewater 
coming from the aquaculture tank ca n be treated there and this  media actually works as a bio 
filter for treati ng those wastewat er pl us it is su pplied to the aquatic your agricultural crops 
and these hydroponic crops.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:08)  
 
Second one is D eep water culture . In the D eep w ater culture or raft culture or floating 
systems, we use diffe rent rafts and then we put o n a small containers like in a porous 
containers or jars where we keep our plants with the presence of some porous media and then 
this root system is attached to  the shallo w film of this or like some times deep film of not hing 
also a  deep water like which i s flow ing underneath of it .  
And the flow of water which is like continuous here and this water is actually provided  with 
the either hydroponics solutions or aqu aponics where aquaculture was te water . And they 
consume the water this root system is actually consu ming the nutrient from t he media from 
this deep water culture and  they use it for their surviv ing purpose . 
So, normally we use this Styro foam which ac ts as a h ow to set this raft and all , additional 
securing can be done using the net grow pots in the holes  below the by f iling the clay or 
coconut media and the  plant substrate. I t involves the utilization of filters throughout the 
cycle  to ensur e appropriate recirculation. And also it is  the highest producing aquaponic  
system techniques because of its de sign, as the raft can cover a huge amount of space and can 
be reused after harvesting the plant s. (Refer Slide Time: 13:47)  
 
Nutrient film technique, it involves the growing of plants within a narrow channel of like 
gutters or like  normal pipe like struc ture. So, in this pipeline structure, there is a narrow water 
body which is like keep on flowing and this water line of plants are place d at a certain 
interval.  It includes a continuous this thin  flow of water supplying more oxygen and nutrients 
and which will h elp the growth of the root much better way.   
It is though it is not a widely used aquaponic system sometimes because due to the risk of 
clogging by the generated organic waste.  In case of aquaponic system technique I am talking 
about it allows only g rowin g some very few small plants like the leafy greens without large 
roots to avoid the clogging and all it requires an additiona l biological filter, since the system 
is not exposed to air, it requires constant maintenance.  
So, these are some issues with  the aquaponic system. In general as a hydroponic systems , a 
standalone hydroponic systems nutrient film technique is very good, b ut for aquaponic 
systems it is better to go for a deep water culture  the second one that we discussed . (Refer Slide Time: 14: 51) 
 
What are the fish generally used in aquaculture systems aquaponic systems T ilapia , Trout, 
Catfish , Bass, Gold fish, Koi, Pacu , et cetera . So you can definitely grow them and because 
one of the majo r reason to go for this  carps and all like specificall y and this Tilapia’s and all , 
what they do they are  actually they are  susceptible  to minor environmental changes.  
So, suppose  in gener al there is a chance of the treat ment is not enough and they  have they are 
sustaining in slightly poor environmental condi tion w ater parameters . Still with this certain 
increment in the pollutant level a lso the species can survive . So, that is the  reason we go 
ahead with this kind of production with these kind of fishes and not only that, their biomass 
growth is also very hig h it can also you can have a very high economic benefit also if you 
grow this kind of fishes.  
These are some of them  they grow in different temperature levels that you need to maintain 
and based on your area of culture, if you are  from temperate region, yo ur area of culture is 
different in structural and design will be different, if it is from the equat orial region your 
design and  expectations will be different, like different species will be there .  
And also if you want to mimic  environment in exotic envir onment in that you can also culture 
the temperate plan ts in temperate species in equatorial  region or equatorial  species in the 
temperate region. In general, the maturation size , the duration to reach maturity and oxygen 
requir ement are the  one which are v ery impo rtant in this matter.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:31)  
 
The plants wh ich can do well in aquaponics, mostly the leafy vegetables, you can go the fruit 
vegetables, you can go ahead with some root vegetables and more than you can go ahead 
with different ki nd of ho rticulture crops also which an Ayurved ic crops also which will a lso 
give you very high benefit. If you go ahead with this kind of aquaponic system.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:49)  
 
What are the types of growing media , we can go ahead with a Substrate mi xture th e Oasis 
Horticubes we can go  ahead  with the peat pellets . In cas e of conventional hydroponics we use  
this peat moss or coconut coir,  sand, sawdust or rice  hulls with the addition of perlite  or 
vermiculite on the clay pebbles . In case of synthetic m edia, th e polymer bound plugs like peat pellets or coir pellets or  compo sted organic , material  plugs , can be used rock wool cubes a nd 
blocks can be used coconut c oir cube s and block s can also be used as a substrate.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:28)  
 
So, when we , we now k now about what is aquaponic  system, how it works, what  can be the 
target species, like in terms of plant in terms of aquaculture species? So what is smart 
aquaculture system in that aquaponic system in this case? And why we need this s mart 
aquapon ic system s? W ith the smar t only,  nowadays, it is like smartphones , what does that 
mean? It  keeps your life much easier,  gives you real time data of different things.  
So, whenever we use this smart with any existing technology, it means that you can monitor  
it you can  like kind of real you can do the real time monitor ing of the systems by reflecting 
the data of your field based , field based system to your mobil e or any handheld gadgets. S o 
that is  when we call them smart systems in general.  
So, over the yea rs, this s ustainability of the environment is a major issu e and the food 
security or the  things that we normally wor ry about. So all these concer ns are actually let us 
ensure some  safe and hazard free food production . Aquapon ics is actually proven to be th e 
revoluti onary technology  in this organic agriculture fie ld. (Refer Slide Time: 18:59)  
 
However, it also comes with some additional requirement of monitoring. This monitoring this 
development of concept of  a bio integrated farming systems i ntegrated wit h the Inte rnet of 
things based  electronic technology, we c all them smart aquaponic systems. IoT is what IoT is 
a system of interrelated internet connected objects that can collect and transfer data over a 
wireless network without the need of human interven tion. What  are the data that we can get?  
It depends upon t he sensor that you have utilized. Suppose you have you put a CPH sensor in 
your aquaculture tank, you can get the real time pH data on your mobile all the time, 
temperature, nitrate conte nt, water c onductivit y, ammoni acal content, et cetera . So you can 
you can get all this data to your system  to your handheld gadgets. I t incorporates the 
renewable sources of energy like solar energy to power the rechargeable batteries instead of  
traditional power sou rces. (Refer Slide Time: 20:00)  
 
What are the components  of aquacultural aquaponic systems first is data acquisition unit. 
This is nothing but the sensors . So, because it is sensors they continuously measure the 
temperature , pH level , water flow rate , light intensi ty over the crop, the plant height  which 
are normally it is very much of  our importance because you have this particle aquaponic 
systems where you have very limited space or landscape and where yo u want to grow it 
optimally . 
So, all these inform ation are n ecessary for you to get in real ti me manner, because you cannot 
just go and do the human intervention for say like one acre of land of Aquaponics  systems 
you can do it in 10 feet by 10 feet of select 10 like small say like  10 square meter of  area, but 
you cannot do it for 10,000 square met er of area , right.  
So, like or say like 4000 square met er. So, all these cases , we have to go ahead with as less 
human intervention as possible . Alarm unit , the green LED light indicates the healthy 
systems red  LED light w ith a buzzing sound it alerts the  users when the system is unhealthy . 
System rectification unit it facilitates the automatic rectification of the system abnormality by 
activating the required actuator.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:25)  
 
What are the actuators th at we can  have ? W e can have water  heater , suppose your 
temperature goes below certain thresholds, water heater will automatically switched on or 
you can m anually do it or you can or  you can just simply put a button in or mobile and it will 
just you can swit ch it on . Secondary water pump , suppose somehow your water pump got 
affected and it is not somehow it is not  working at its complete capacity .  
What you can do ? You can switch on the secondary water pumps to maintain the  flow 
because just realize this you a re dealing with a living being.  This aqua this agriculture crops 
or this aquatic species they have life they need as because you are not letting them grow in 
their natural condition it is completely in your hand you have to control it you hav e to control 
their system so optimally that t hey will not be in stress at any moment of time, otherwise your 
production will be hampered .  
So the LED grow light is also important to provide a stable blue and red light to support the 
plant growth when the a mbient light a nd intensities are appropriate . Fish feeder supplies  the 
fish feeds as per the user’ s preset timing. So, this activation and deactivation of this actuators 
are controlled by the central processing unit or CPU on the basis of the coll ected dat a or user 
preset data . (Refer Slide Time: 22 :47) 
 
Fourth  one is a central processing unit. It divides into 2 sections first, it involves and say 
Arduino Mega systems or like it depends I am giving you just 2 examples and a relay board 
to communicate and control the se nsors and all the actuators . Also you can use a Raspberry 
Pi unit acting as a central control unit and a camera  module to enable the live str eaming 
features or like  the amount of the plant growth that you can make can prove that you can 
monit or. 
Fifth  one you can go ahead with a wave ap plication, it will provide you with the proper 
graphical user interface or GUI for the system to display or monitor the collected sensor 
values. It also facilitates the remo te control of the actuators. So sixth  is a mobile ap plication it 
can be created on the Android or say like iOS based platform, it displays the live sensor 
values and it will enable the user to remotely control all the actuators that you have as , as I 
discussed in the last slide.  (Refer Slide Time: 23:46)  
 
Also it will  permit the user to control the threshold value o f each sensor in real time. See 
seven th the last one is the cloud server why we need cloud server ? It connects the central 
processing unit and the mobile application and it actuall y mainly store s the collected data 
obtained from the data acquisition unit and redirects the action like activating the water heater 
are provided by the mobile application to the central processing  unit and  it works like either 
way around . 
(Refer Slide Tim e: 24:13)  
 
So, if you see this flow l ike we have this hydroponic component we can provide it with a 
light sensor , duo sensor we have air conditioning unit, which will … whatever the water vapor  and like evaporated water from the  fish tank and transmitted w ater like this above  transmitted 
water  in general, from your tank from your system can go to the air conditioning system .  
And the condensed water again  flow back to the reservoir from the reserve it comes to the 
fish tank and the air pump is also continuo usly there to provide the dissolved ox ygen to your 
fish tank.  Your fish tank can have pH sensor, do sensor, ammonia sensors. So these senso rs 
all the sensors you can it can be the tank wat er can be treated in the Bio filter .  
It can be moving bed b iofilm reactor it can be rope bed biofilm reactor  it can be B io 
electrochemical systems all this technology I have discussed in earlier modules . This B io 
filter once it is converted into a preferable form of nitrogen then it will supply to the  
hydroponics system . 
All these things can be how like can be modified into the smart aquaponic systems as we 
discussed you have this local server internet you can get , get all the data in your mobile 
applications, it can have this micro controller, the sen sors and all will giv e the data  to your 
micro controller , micro controller will ask the relay to control the actua tors like fish feeder , 
water flow rate et cetera . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:45)  
 
So, these are this is why it is called Smart aquaculture systems , I really request yo u guys to 
go ahead and Google it and you can start the  research work going on in IIT Kharagpur itself 
in my lab and also you can go ahead with the different work going on in all over the world. So, it is very high end technology now pe ople are working on and this is  the future  the food 
production I would say in general . 
What are the challenges that are there in case of smart  Aquaponics systems the excessive 
accumulation of dissolved nitrogen, nitrate  in the reused water because so metimes the nitrate 
gets it is still be there w ith time it can get passed through this hydroponic life and because the 
it can lead to the overstimulation and the mutation of the cultured aquatic organisms that has 
to be taken care of .  
In the co nventional aquaponic systems water los ses due to the evaporation  is only around 1.5  
percent  while for smart aquaponic systems it can be a little bit higher, because you use 
different small device sensors and all which produce heat and energy.  However, they  can be 
minimized if you have a proper  air conditioning unit and proper system air conditioning  
which will provide and reduc e in the water consumption in general .  
As the same water rec irculates between the bed and the fish tank does the chances of system  
contamination increases as one’ s conta minated the infest ation spreads rapidly but you can 
control it . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:15)  
 
Actually this is controllable if you put proper effort in your system, you can definitely contro l 
it you can minimize the  any damage to your system. So, in conclusi on what we learned  from 
this smart Aquaponics  systems , first of all, this Aquaponics system  we know it is a closed 
loop recycling of fresh water between the cultured fish and a plant , 3 types of aquaponic systems we di scussed media based,  deep water cultur e and nutrient fil m technique or NFT in 
short .  
Smart aquaponic systems we discuss about the comp onents that it has like  in general the data 
acquisition unit , alarm unit , system rectification unit, central processing u nit, wave 
application, mobile applicat ion and cloud serv er. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:09)  
 
So, the major takeaway from this lecture, I am  pretty sure that yo u get to know some very 
high knowledge about these smart aquaponic systems and you can I will be very happy to 
help you with the further dev elopment of knowle dge on this particular sector. In general, this 
is a sustainable farming system that combines aquaculture with hydroponics which is like , 
like culture of plant cultivation of plant withou t the presence of soil together into a control 
unit. 
Smart aquacultu re Aquaponics  systems is a development concept in a bio integrated farming 
system integrated with Internet of Things based electronic technology, it involves the adverse 
sensors for m onitoring parameters like pH, temperature, nitrate, wate r conductivity, 
ammonia, et cetera  it incorporates renewable sources of energy like solar energy to power 
rechargeable batteries, instea d of traditional power.  
So, the same way as we discussed in the  last lecture also if you remember we can utilize the 
geothermal energies and all to reduce or the some structural modification in the Poly  houses to reduce the load in your refrigeration unit and we can make it green refrigeration unit as 
well. (Refer Slide Time: 29:13)  
 
So, these are the references that we can follow to know more d etails more information about 
this technology and how what is it all about. So, I hope this lecture is , was really give you 
some  very basic, some like overall details about aquaponic systems and how the smart 
aquaponic system works . I hope you can utilize this knowledge and you can develop your 
own entrepreneurial or research g oal in this field in future . Thank you so much. See you in 
the next lecture.  