Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agri cultur al and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture  44 
Integrated farming (Cont.)  
(Refer Sli de Time: 0:30) 
 
 
Hello everyone, welcome to the fou rth lecture of module 9, technology of organic farming. 
So, my name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick , I am from agriculture food engi neering 
department  of IIT Kharagpur . So, the concepts that will be covered in this particu lar lecture 
material will be the  fish agriculture farming systems, we have already gone through a basic 
discussion about the integrated farming processes and  all. So, here I  will be continuing it 
from the previous lecture . Fish and rice agriculture  types, fish fields selection, horticult ure-fish culture , and agriculture -aquaculture -livestock systems , or sometimes we call them AALS  
also.  
So, in general, when we go , when we talk about the fish agriculture farming systems that we  
in con tinuation  with our previous lecture . In this particular  example, I want to let you know 
about  the fish and rice like  culture , like or we call it rice -cum-fish culture systems. So, it has 
been practiced for long, even thousands  of years back even it was see n in some pictures of 
some earlier days, like some ther e are literatures available people have mentioned that in 
China and in South -eastern Asia, even thousands  of years back people used to practice this 
rice-cum-fish culture .  
Because  the ric e normally they grow in a standing water, so, why not to culture it along with 
the fish, that water can be utilized by the fish and it can be beneficial for different purposes , 
that I will be discuss  in detail. So, first of all, it has been practiced for long  and there are 
reasons for it, first of all, it will improve the income of the farmer, definitely, because you are  
at the same footprint and the same, I mean, like the land that you are  using, but you are  
getting much more higher  yield , you are  getting the  crop as well as you are  getting the fish 
production . I do not  know the fish has a  very high like market values and all in general.   
And also, to make available the essential item , in the rural , diet of the rural items in areas 
where rice and fish normall y form the staple food.  Like, the world places like most of the 
rural areas in West Bengal, Jharkhand, in some part of the Jharkhand , some part of the Bihar , 
and this region specifically if I talk about even if you go to the Assam, and the north -western  
area. So, this is just  an example where we can you can find people l ike very much fond of 
rice and fish at the same time. So, this , and especially Bengal is the  famous where they are 
very much  having , they are very much famo us for their fish love and all .  
So, anyway so this rice and fish culture can drastically improve th e income as well as the 
nutritional requirement of the rural people like  for the farmers who are culturing there as 
well. Fish feed in genera l on organisms which grow on the field , and on many of the noxious 
insects and their larval stages so it actually s omehow promote the better rice production as 
well. So, it is like a win win situation for both of them.  (Refer Sli de Time: 3:37) 
 
There are three differen t types of rice and field a quaculture  systems . The first one which 
sometimes known as synchronous , or combined , or simultaneous farming.  From the name 
itself you can identify , it is a like rice and fish is f armed  at the same time  and the same 
duration . And in case of sequential , or rice-aquaculture rotation , or alternate f arming,  from 
the name itself  you can understand it is like rotation basis. The first rice then once it is 
harvested, then there is like fish culture like this. And then there comes a re lay farming , relay 
farming  is little  bit complicated, like suppose you start with both , rice and fish. But say like, 
you are  harvesting time is already there for rice , you take it out on but still fishes  are there.  
So based on the , their develop ment  or matu ration stage and all , the fishes  will be there, and 
then it will be , while it  when the ir harvest ing time will come. Maybe j ust before that only 
another season for rice has occurred. So, you have to make it very complicated, very 
precisely  you have to take it out to a different po nd and all. I will be discussing in details like 
how it is done. So, relay, farming is a little bit complica ted, where there is no , like, it depends 
on the maturation stage o f both o f the stage of both of the s pecies , rather than on the 
flexibility of our expectations.  
So, synchronous farming both rice and fish this is grown simul taneously , harvested at the 
same time and by this method, it is witnessed that rice yield can be increased up to 15  
percent age more th an the conventional method using this synchronous , or combined , or 
simultaneous  farming.  (Refer Sli de Time: 5:21) 
 
In case of sequential farming , as I mentioned , this in case of sequential farming the aquatic  
species  are grown after harvesting of rice . So, normally rice tuples are still there in the water 
and the bottom of the field and which f acilitates the growth of decom posing microorgan isms 
and which actually act as food for your aquatic species. Only limitation is about 20 to 60  
percent  loss of aquatic species happened because of some piscivorous  birds like herons,  
cormorants and etc etera . So, this is the only disadvant age of it, what are the advantage of it ? 
Like no limitation in for the depth of water , and either in rice cultivation or in aquatic sp ecies 
what does that mean ? That like it is not that afte r rice cultivation, you have to reduce the 
water , you have to increase the water , the water level can be as it is.  
Maintenance of the adequate water level provides sufficient DO and the temperature , and also 
rice st ubble  decomposition and microbial food and because of t his decomposition process, 
and this microbial food is availab le for aquatic species and also it can act as fertilizer for the 
next cycle of rice for improved production . Using the mono or polyculture of aquatic species 
is possible and it will reduce the att ack by insect , pests , and all. Because their larva es are 
being ea ten by the t hose species  and all .  (Refer Sli de Time: 6:42) 
 
So, this is the second one , what is the third one ? Is the relay  farming , so what is a relay  
farming ? It is actually a very, it is an ultimate prolong method , and little bit compl icated, 
because it is like a combination of previous two sys tems . In both farming of rice and aquatic 
species they like say they started together , but the aquatic species is not harvested by rice is 
already harvested. Now, during the harvesting period of r ice, what we need to do, we cannot 
just go and disturb the fish species. W hat we need to do, we need to transfer all the aquatic 
species in the , in that land to a special ditch or special pond which should be connected with 
the prope r channel or tools on t he rice field .  
Now, they are aga in restocked when the rice field,  after filing of the water for further growth, 
it means this method requires additional rea ring facility for transferring  fish at the time of rice 
harvestin g. Other than that, good thing abo ut it be relay farming  it provi des a high amount of 
aquatic protein with high yield of rice crop with short duration , the drawback of this method 
is the investment and the labour . So other than that, you what you c an do after the harvesting 
is done you can  put the fish back to the sy stem , or you can put the back in the , you can grow 
it in the special ditches  of this  different re aring system also , it is up to you .  
But so in general, this is the problem with the relay farming  that you are  doing two things 
together, but they are not matching with  the time , and also sometimes it is latest , little 
problematic and you have to optimize the problem , the like  at which time you  are going to 
harvest and at which time here t he fish will reach its maturation stage , and what will be the 
next period of run  like for your rice crop? So, all these things you have to calculate and based on that you have to start like study  your business , start your farm. L ike this kind of rice -cum-
fish farms  and all .  
(Refer Sli de Time: 8:46) 
 
 
So, we already got to know about this rice-cum-fish farm and all. So,  what ab out the selection 
of rice fields ? So, which type of rice field  is like  kind of optimum for this kind of rice, rice 
and fish culture ? First of all the topography and th e contou rs of the land will make the 
difference in preparation of rice  field. B ecause suppos e, you have a rice field which has very 
like not regular slope, but rather irregular slope and also because of it what happened when 
suppose you want to drain  the whole wat er, drain from the system and all . Like you have  a 
you need  to drain the water you cannot , it will  keep on accumulating in certain places inside 
the rice field  and all .  So, what you need to do you need to prepare the proper bottom , I mean like the ri ce soil, that 
the soil , the soil  that which you are preparing. So that has to be properly prepared , and this 
may, that slope has  to be maintained in such a way that it will connect ed it, once it will you 
wish you can directly connect it to the proper canal syst ems and it will take the wate r to a 
particular destination.   
There are different types of rice field , identified for these kinds of ac tivities. I mean like this 
kind of rice -cum-fish culture . Suppose we have a rice field which is like this type of , it look s 
like this. So, the  middle p art is actually the most elevated on e, and then all the other parts are 
like the slope is towards the per imeter , what will happen  because of that ?  
The water , it will stagnant and the moment you want it to be drained the water it is much 
easier because you can dr ain the whole water without even letting any like amount of water 
inside the rice field . So, this type of field is normally prepared with a moderate elevation and 
round sloping all the sides towards the perimeter fringe , and this middle of this lan d is very 
much perfect  area for growing the rice.  
Second type of field is central po nd-type. In case of central po nd-type,  what ha ppened it is 
like suppose you have a rectangular field , in between you have another small rectang le, so in 
this small rectangle is actu ally the place where it is the po nd where rice is , the aquatic species 
is growing . And it is along with ring like structure .  
So the re, the periphe ral structure actually the rice is growing , and those rice fields that they 
are like their water , their like, their slope is it would be better if it is towards the field , or 
outward the field, outward towards the perimeter  of the field. So, based on your design  and 
your destination , your outlet design  and all these things.  Another  type o f field is called lateral 
trench -type field.  You will design , you will prepare d different type of trench , it can be in one 
side, it can be other side like basica lly it has to be a continuous system , like a can al like 
structure  where the fishes  will be normally dwelling .  
So, suppose you have , I will show you some figure. So, first of all this first figure if you  see 
is the perimeter -type.  In the perimeter -type as I mentioned I told you like in the middle it has 
to be the rice field , and it has to be  going towards the outer  wards  like perimeter area. So, this 
perimeter trench will be utili sed as a fish, or the aquatic , any aquatic species  that you are  
targeting . In case of perimeter -type, in case of this centra l-pond  if you see this i n case of see 
the centra l-pond,  this inside this like as I told you it is like one rectangular structure , another rectangle in between or squa re. So, there the central -pond  will be there , the fish  will be grown 
there , and the pa ddy filed  will be surrounding to it.  
So, this  slope you can make it towards the central -pond,  outside outwards the central -pond  
whatever it is , and this central -pond  also has to be a underwater drainage line. So that if you 
want to get i t under  water or in open drain line, so, if you want to ge t rid of the water it has to 
be as easy as that . So, that line should be prepare d, to be better to have this kind of line s 
ready with you, in case of emergency.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 13:13) 
 
This is the one that  I was talking about the trench -type. In case of lat eral trench -type see the 
lateral trench is the most regular one that you find very commonly in case of this rice  fish like 
integrated culture systems. In case of rice -cum-fish culture, you see this paddy field is in 
between and ther e is this lateral trench  in the both of the sides. So, this lateral trench is 
actually used for growing the fish or aquatic species , and in the middle we have this padd y 
fields .  
So, the wat er it is it can be lo cked  there , it can the fish can be easily dwell  over the la tter 
trench , if they want they can come inside the paddy field also, if you want to design it, like 
that way or simply water can go directly towards the lateral trench , and it will go out from the 
padd y filed, the moment you will take it, moment yo u will o pen the drainage c anal.   
It can be other types also , the trench is not necessary  to be like lateral tren ch, based on your 
design and based on your  area like the system , the typography and all you can design it 
differently, it can be di agonal tren ch, you ca n see the first one,  this is like the  this cross one is the cross tr ench,  you can see the Y shaped trench, you can see this  peripheral and one central 
longitud inal trench , you can have it t wo equ idistance traverse s with peripheral trench , you 
can see  the b ottom left. 
The bottom right is the latest trench , you can know since like H like structure , extended H 
like structure  and all. So, these are the type of trenches that you can prepare , you can , it is 
actually entirely up to you that how , what is your target , like is it like a rice is your main 
product , main crop or I mean like main yield  for your main economic return is giving rice or 
the fish ? In either way you have to design it in such a way that your expectation  will be 
fulfilled . And based on that you ha ve to design it either it is a tren ch, or this central -pond  tank 
or whatever. So, based on that you have to choose the fish also.  
So, fish is a lso important factor here because you cannot choose  only the type of fish which 
cannot which do not , like it is like a say like, it is not a larvivores  one, or say like not a  proper  
carnivorous  one, or just a herbivor ous one,  or something. So , for them to  sustain you have to , 
they need to it needs to be provided with the phytoplankton , enough  amount of 
phytoplankton , so that also something that you need to worry about that you need to think 
about before starting your business , before starting your farm , that you  have you study 
enough and you get to know about  all the things enough that before starting your farm . 
Because of the it is a risky business , if it is a living organisms that you are culturing, you 
have to be very much cautious about that.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 16:11) 
  
So, what are the preparation  procedure of field for this kind of rice fish  culture ? So, first of 
all, it is definitely it is mandatory to have a good preparation , and it should hold enough water 
over a large enough area , for enough time to produce enough fish , it should pre vent a serious 
flooding of the di kes and the boundar ies of the r ice field , because we will lose a lot of 
produce , lot of your  fish and  all.  
Rice fish culture it can be carried out under rain  fed or irrigated conditions in either direct 
seeded or transplanted  fields.  The wide scale of rice  field is still constr ained by continued  
application of  pesticides in rice based farming and which is the major drawback of this kind 
of system s. Because there are still  people like farmers who use , and it is like  kind and  
sometimes necessary  for higher yield for specifi c regions where they nee d to produce, they 
need to provide it , they need to apply the pesticides  and all,  which is not good .  
Which is not good in terms of what like first of all it is harmful chemical , there are a lot of  
harmful chemicals involved with  it, this pe sticide  and all. I t can kill your living , any living 
system associated with it specifically if you  culturing fish , it will not sustain . Because 
specific mostly we the amount of pesticide that we suppl y, it is good enough for  fish to be in 
stress condi tion a nd a long enough  exposure can even kill them , it can be lethal for them.  
Moreover, that is not good for our consumption as well.  So, the there are a lot of way by we 
can, you can still provide pesticides but you can help get rid of any harmful e ffects in a fish. 
You, what you can do you can choose and apply properly pesticides that have very low 
toxicity to fish , you can minimize the pesticide getting mixed with water. So, you can it is 
very difficult though like you  have to have provide t he pesticide  in su ch a way that it will not 
get mix ed to the water  or because of its specific pellet  like structure , specific packaging or like, even like it is not even like, it is like you just cannot do that , because it is a liquid m ost 
of the cases it is liquid an d it is liquid. A nd mos t of the cases the  pesticides are actually they 
are prone to they  are mostly water soluble.  
So, you can try for it , like try to make it dry and use the pesticide and once you see that 
pesticide action is done and all . And then you g et bac k to action agai n so it is still risky . And 
apply at suitable times , you have if you can do that it is good like what I  am giving some 
example , what how we can help your fish to survive in this kind of sce nario.  
First of all, you d rive the fish into the sump, and drain th e field  slowly before spraying , and 
keep the fish in the sump until the toxicity of this sprayed field is gone. You can increase the 
water depth to dilute the concentration of pesticide in the w ater for the time bein g. And also, 
you c an flu sh the water thr ough the ric e field. What will happen in all the cases , the fish will 
get less exposure to the pesticides but still it is dangerous , I am telling you .  
So, because there are different types of compou nds there which c an be bio accumula ted, and 
there  is a hi gh chance it will kill your living any living means,  like little as for  fish for sure. 
And in case of bioconversion,  it can be dangerous for the higher trophic level animals , like 
whoever is eating  them like,  this case specifically  it is for human consumpt ion, it is hard, it is 
not good  for our health also. So, what are the benefits of so , first of all, like we need to get rid 
of pesticides, we try to get rid of as much as possible from the pesticides and whatever we  
will go the  rice an d fish culture  and al l.  
So, what ar e the benefits of rice f ish culture ? It is a low risk  technology compared to the other 
practices, a dependable source of fish for farmers. And conservation of water is possible , time 
saving a nd good source of i ncome defi nitely , it is less co mpetitive among pr oducers , and 
improves the  rice productivity and also promotes a better livelihood . Rice productivity  is 
definitely it increases most of the cases it is witnessed it can increase a lot , the production 
capacity and all. And not only that, it is like they are kind of it is a kind of symbiotic 
relationship.  
So, fish is helping like, all th ese plants to get rid of all that pest attac k and all these things . 
And that other  way, whatever the stubbles  when they get degrade  at this micro-organism , 
which degrading micro -organism  are actually the feed for the fish . So, this both way they are 
actually helping each other to grow in this way it is this rice and fish culture is very much 
helpful and very much it turned out to be  econo mically very successf ul process .  (Refer Sli de Time: 21:25) 
 
What are the problems othe r than the pesticides which relates to which is there with the rice 
fish culture ? It requires  the land , definitely anywhere you want to go for rice culture or fish 
cultu re you  need a la nd. Production cannot be guaranteed especially in r ain fed situation , it is 
very important when there is a like rain fed situation , it is really risky . And first of all, there is 
a risk of  flooding and all that though  if you can somehow man age to put a band h or 
someth ing. So, it will increase the water level , it can cause  problem to your crop or  to aquatic 
species whatever. So, it is like there is a lot of possibilities and lot of . So, especially rain fed  
situations is not  so good .  
Pesticid e and other toxic ch emic als ca n kill the fish . Definitely , you should be kept away  
from them . Poaching  activities major in phenomena  that major thing that happened like 
people  go and steal other ’s fish, other’s animal . Fiel d preparation will demand a large  
inves tment of time , labour , and money . Marketing problem is there sometimes .  
Seed  fish supply is ve ry common problem actual ly, that is there for any culture , not only for 
this, but any culture, seed suppl y is one of the  major problems specifically in Indi an sce nario, 
one of  the sector that is go ing to bloom in near future, but at this m oment, it is really very , it 
is in very beginning stage , weak stage.  Predators  can seriously reduce the  fish stock 
definitely. So, all these problems are there with this kin d of r ice fish cult ure.  
So, the third one tha t is there is the rice  fish rotation . The const raints  and th e conflicts as we 
discus sed in the other issues like  the other (())(23:22 ) situations , it do not apply when fish 
culture is practice  in rotation with rice cultiva tion, the int erval between rice farmi ng and fish stocking has to be long enough to allow the degradation of p esticide . So, you do not  have to 
worry about this pesticide s and all,  application is fish, rice.  Infestation by insect , pests  can 
also be reduced a s thei r lifecycle are disrupted by the alternation of c rop and associated 
practices.  
So, they cannot grow properly. Suppose t he moment they normally is their breeding time and 
all say all this pest, you do not  grow, we just do not  go for a ri ce, you just  grow fish at that 
time. So, they will not be able to fed their generat ion and it will completely  evolution,  it will 
not be able to attack the rice at that particular  moment of time. So, it actually somehow 
changed the cycle a little bit but how however th is rice fish rotation is mu ch, much more 
benefi cial.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 24:22) 
 
The horticulture fish culture the crop of f ruits, vegetables and fl owers can be cultivated in on 
inner or the outer  dyke  and adjoining areas of the fish  pond,  which is very g ood. It will n ot 
only give you economic return , it will also give you some a esthetic , it will it looks also very 
good , it can have a park ne arby, it will increase  the aesthetic , we call them aesthetic 
enhancement  and all , that is also possible . Crop plants  like most of them those should be 
provided in thi s kind of structure , in this kind of culture syste m, horticulture fish cult ure, it 
should  be seasonal , evergreen , or seasonal , or like dwarf , remunerativ e, or and less shady .  
The Makhana , or the Singhara  are two  aquatic  herbs that can be integrated along w ith air-
breathing  on carnivorous species. These c ash crops  are cultivated in many states as they have 
both nutritional and the medicin al values.  And this acts as an additional income with very 
little input  and c are, because they g et all that essential nutrients  from the nearby vicinity and that is okay  for them . And so, they can easily gr ow, aquatic herbs can easily grow on the 
inner and outer dikes of the, or the  adjoining area the fishpond and also it wil l incr ease it will 
reduce the so il erosion as well from this d ykes and all. So, that is also possible . Additionally,  
you wi ll get incom e, like maximum income  from thi s type of  systems.   
(Refer Sli de Time: 25:53) 
 
Fruits with the fish culture , banana , mango, papaya, lime, coconut plants can be cultivated on 
the pond embankment  in rows , and by making ditches between the rows , and its ditch es have 
continuous supply of water so for them it is like a very perfect place to grow , and 
simultaneously you can grow the air breath ing and live this larvivorous  species like Channa 
marulius , this Channa st riatus  and Tilapia etc etera. And that can be cu ltured in these ditches , 
and which have a rich populat ion of insect larva .  
Vegetables with fish culture like seasonal , or fast g rowing  or market ready crops should be 
preferred brinjal , tomato, gourds, cucumber, chil li, carrot, radish, turnips, spinach, cabbage, 
cauliflowe r, ladies finger,  etcetera  maybe the choice that you can  grow on the side of it of 
your culture  pond . It will g ive yo u additional economic benefits. So, this way we can do this 
kind of  multi crop c ulture , or we can go for this kind of integrated farming and it w ill it is 
very important  it is very helpful for higher economic return and maximum utilization of the 
land footprint.  (Refer Sli de Time: 27:06) 
 
The flowering plants like Rose, Jasmine , Marigold, Gladiolus, Poppy etc etera, 
chrysanthemum , so etcetera can be successfully cultivated along  the ponding management as 
you can see in the bot tom picture, it is done  on the inner side of the  embankment , and the 
outer side , even in the on the width of the embankment  as well . They have re ady market and 
this culture provides 20 to 25  percent  more return in terms of the aquaculture alone.  
High  value crops  like you ca n just you can go for turmeric culture, which will give you  
additional medicinal value , and that can be c ultured  very easily in this kin d of scenario , and 
you will get more return from your system , from your farm.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 27:50) 
 So, agricult ure-aquaculture livestock farming syste ms where agriculture , aquaculture plus 
livestock is done at the same time three of them , or we sometimes call them ALS  syste m, 
AALS. So, in this kind of cases, we its major purpose is to provi de cheap  feedst uffs and 
organi c manure for the fish  pond. By  reducing the cost of fertilizer and feedstock the overall 
cost of fish production is reduced and profits increased up to 30  to 40  percent age. The overall 
income is also increased by adding pig or pou ltry raising or grain  or vegetable farming and 
etcetera,  and whic h can supplement the income from the fish farming , by producing this 
grain , vegetables , fish, or livestock the community becomes self sufficient in regard to food 
and those contributes to a high degree of self re lianc e.  
Silt from the pond which is use d for to fertilize the crops increases the yield of the crops at a 
lower cost , and the need to buy chemical fertilizer is greatl y reduced. So, that is how you are  
having your agriculture  field, aquaculture product, l ivest ock at the same ground a t the same 
place which will definitely give you all the possible nutrient , that is that it requires in your 
community. So, it can be done in community bases in a small land you can convert it into 
aqua culture pond plus small agricultural land, that has to be pract iced very like it is a time , it 
is really it is a need of the hour right now.  
So, because al though  if you see the skyscrapers and all the things that  is happening in the 
municipal ity areas, and all the re, they can som ehow a rrange some area o n the back of their, 
their how to s ay building and all , some area they can provide and they can start growing some  
fruits, small fruits , or vegetables , or say like flowerin g plants, they can have a small 
aquaculture pond .  
And by the  side of it, you  can put  some seating area so it will be nice seating place for your 
people like for the  recreation purposes also  you can use it , and you can have the livestock in 
rearing, you can simply just you ju st put some duck there and duckling s there and they will 
grow. And this duck can also be like  this kind of stuff, this kind of c ulturing  practices has to 
be more i ntense more like  more popular.  (Refer Sli de Time: 30:23) 
 
So, you can see this is one example of how agricultura l-aquaculture and livestock farming 
works like . So, you if you see in t he picture, in the right, this is a rice field where the chickens 
are there , and also in chickens a re there in their farm and this poultry and just below them 
there  is like a fish it is dwelling.  So, because of that this fish can get enough  food from the 
chicken , because they have their excreta are actually they  are dropping s are there in the fish. 
And that  is a very rich source of nutrients for the fish and all.   
And a lso they can grow here and there , and t he chickens ca n feed all the pest from the nearby 
areas a nd all , from the pest or the insects from the nearby areas  and all  by which you can , it 
can also hel p in making a very nice symbiotic relationship between  all of them.  So, this 
AALS  is very import ant, that is a agricul ture, aquaculture and livestock far ming systems and 
this th ere is lot of future , there is lot of possibilities in Indian scenario .  
Anyone can grow anywh ere like almost anywhere you can just  replicate it , replicate the 
optimum scenario , you  can just go ahead with it. And it will give you, not only benefit, bu t it 
will give a lot of employability , help with employability with the nearby people , and also 
help with the country in general to increase the G DD there,  to increase  the self relia nce, and 
all these things so.   (Refer Sli de Time: 31:51) 
 
 
In conclus ion, this IAAS , or this integrated agri culture aquaculture syst ems is the multiple 
use of water for both traditional and traditional terrestrial  farmi ng, plus aquaculture and 
which turn s out to be a profitable and ecologically sustainable business. Cultured animal feed 
on the plant waste materials a nd grow and harvested af ter the crop and when the field is 
drained , a double crop plant and animal is obtain ed from the field.  
So multiple so urces of incom e generation is possible. And as a takeaway message , we can 
say that  water is like the most precious an d inefficient utilize na tural resources. If we can 
efficiently utilize it, it can give us a lot of fruit. In real sense, it will it can giv e us a lot of  
fruit.   Integration of farming practices to enhance the productivity and wate r use efficiency it will 
contribute to the ecologically sustain able development of the natural resources. Also, th is 
integrated agricultur e aquaculture systems, it a llows the irri gated farming systems and 
multiple use of same water typically the fish pr oduction first, and then for  irrigation so this 
way they can reduce the overall consumption of water and it can be helpful for our for, like, 
our income purpose  all the se things. So, that is why I really want.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 33:03) 
 
This is the references that you can follow and you can take  a picture and you can go ahead 
with Google and  you can search  for it. And so in general, if I talk about different types of like 
the struct ure, different type of agriculture system , aquaculture systems that we have 
understood we have gone through in this l ecture material,  in the other last lecture ma terial, I 
really appreci ate it like  even like 10  percent  of you people go and fi nd it as their 
employability , empl oying opportunity,  they can go and they have their land definitely they 
have their own land or their land in their village area they can utilize it , it can be a very good 
business it can be a it can employ it will give you  most more sel f sufficient nature , it will , you 
do not  have to worry about anything there will be no loss.  
You just go and have your  own business start your own  start-up and it will giv e you every  
other way it is a win win situation for you , for nature , for the p roductio n, or for the 
production of those  things and they can be easily sell and the mo re the  production that will 
give more availability  in the market , and it wi ll definitely and then if it is exceeding the 
availabili ty you can go for exporting and all these thin gs. That is also that will also help in the 
overall condition, the country's GDP and all this  thing .  So anyway, so that  is it for this lecture. And in  next lecture we  will be discussing about the 
bio-floc technology. An d we  will see how bio-floc technolog y helps us  this kind of organic 
treatment help  us to have organic treatment of aquaculture and it will give us bo th the 
function , treatment of  wastewater plus the fee d for the aquaculture  at the same  one. Thank  
you so much.  See you.  