Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor G ourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 48  
Bioremediation  
Hello, everyone . Welcome to the third lecture material of the module 10 Techno logy of 
Cleaner Production . My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick , I am  from the 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department of IIT , Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:36)  
 
The c oncepts that I  will be covering in this particular lecture material  are th e introduction to 
the bioremediation,  bioremediation of organic detritus , bioremediation  of nitrogenous 
compounds , bioremediation  of the phosphorus compounds and bioremediation of the 
hydrogen sulphide  present in the aquatic regions , and what are the advan tages and the 
disadvantages of bioremediation . (Refer Slide Time: 01:01)  
 
So, to start with, you know that the agriculture it is like an , the aquaculture is kind of a part of 
we know like this broader sense of environmental uses of human activities. So, it is more 
like, we use the water we use the energy source from the environment, and then we use it for 
some beneficial purpose. So, in this particular case, we use this energy , fertilizer , feed,  
chemicals, these things we use and we need to provide it to our aquacultu re species for them 
to grow and survive naturally in artificially . 
So, as a result, it becomes one of the major pollutants source like major polluter of the 
environment, because in aquaculture when they use th ese additional chemicals and when they 
use these compounds use these molecules, they actually does harm after the uses after they 
have been used in a form that we want and then the further products byproducts are actually 
sometimes toxic or can be considered as a pollutant to the systems b ecause those are not 
naturally present in the aquatic system or even in general in the nearby surrounding 
environment.  
So, that is  why aquaculture is considered as one of the major polluters , even you will be 
shocked to know that it is one of the major sources of greenhouse emission as well. So, what 
are the wastes?  What are the form of waste that is actually formed from  this aquaculture 
industries ? So, they can be actually categorized, majorly into the residual food and fecal 
matter , residues of biocides a nd the biostats , metabolic byproduct , their wastes produced 
during their mo ulting. I hope you know mo ulting, moulting is like the crustaceans they get rid of their outer layer 
and to go ahead with the and when there is the formation of the new layer , and this outer 
layer actually considers a different kind of organic substances  and which is called this 
moulting  phenomenon, which can cause a huge waste generation in this kind of form . 
Waste generated from collapsing the algal blooms, and also fertilizer deri ved waste . When 
you supply the additional fertilizer, the waste that has been generated due to that it also are 
one of the major source of pollution in the surrounding society . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:49)  
 
So, what are the environmental impact on the increa sed organic load due to the aquaculture 
activity ? When there is increment in the load of organic , means  like organic load in the 
aquatic body . It increases the metabolic activity and the oxygen demand of aerobic 
microorganisms . Localized hypoxia or anoxia happened followed by anaerobic sulfate 
reduction. This lack of oxygen actually inhibits all the aerobic nitrification process . 
This nitrification process actually it needs oxygen as we already mentioned in earlier lectures, 
right ? So, once there is an inhibition  in the oxygen whereas there is a laser presence of the 
dissolved oxygen, it will cause this anaerobic micro organism  to die off and because of that 
these processes will be drastically affected like this nitrification process . 
The death or the migrati on of the macrofauna  are responsible for biodegradation is also one 
of the major reason . This sediment  macrofauna  they are actually majorly this benthic 
population are kind of , they can be considered as carbon  sink even in the ocean floor , even as  small as  even the pond structure. So, this benthic  population , the population like the sediment 
microbiota, they are very much useful in different cells, it is actually helpful for us as well , in 
like passively they can actually help us as well in differe nt ways.  
So, this macrofauna’s , they actually, they slowly migrated o ff, they slowly completely 
scrapped off from the systems because of this enhanced organic load, because of this 
enhanced organic load and the presence of anoxic condition, this biodegrada tion proc ess we 
can lose and it will, what will happen , at the end, there will be an anoxic sedimentation , this 
anoxic sedimentation is what like this anoxic microorganism will start prevailing there and 
they will completely harm the whole food web system the food ecosystem there, because you 
will not find . 
Because in general, this pelagic and benthic coupling which is considered as an pelagic  zone  
and the benthic zone  their coupling is very important like whatever is forming in the detritus 
in the benthic region th at can be the food for the just the nearby I mean, like neighboring 
trophic chain . So, once you get rid of those food chain , once all of a sudden,  your food the 
availability will be drastically changed, it will drastically affect your whole food we b in 
general. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:28)  
 
In this scenario , bioremediation actually considered as a very effective tool like for managing 
this aquaculture generated waste . What are the other way of doing that ? Definitely, the 
different kinds of treatment u nit we c an install , this treatment unit will treat the water and after the treatment is done then they again put back the water back to the water pond or water 
tank and because of that we can get rid of the unwanted pollutants . 
Bioremediation  is also one o f the ve ry highly efficient technique that we normally use it but it 
involves generally the living organisms like different fungi , cyanobacteria, normal bacteria , 
actinomyces , plants to eliminate and reduce the generated toxic pollutants . What are the 
bioremediato rs? Majorly they are the macro or microorganisms  or their product or byproducts 
which utilized as additives to improve the quality of your pond or pond water or say like tank 
water where you  are culturing  your farm water . 
Certain bioremediators  like probio tics and enzymes are also added to the pond to enhance the 
mineralization of organic matter and to eliminate the undesirable waste compounds.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:45)  
 
So, how we can bioremediate the organic detritus ? What do I mean by the organi c detrit us? 
The majorly the suspended and the dissolved organic matter which are majorly composed of 
the carbon chains, they are abundantly available for the micro bes and the  algae . What is the 
characteristics of ideal bioremediators  in this partic ular case ? 
Biore mediators,  that it should effectively clear up the carbonaceous wastes from the water 
and also it should must rapidly multiply and have very good enzymatic capability, and the 
microorganisms like bacillus subtilis, bacillus cereus, bacillus  coagulan s, bacillus 
licheniformes, pheni bacillus  polymyxa , these are some of the very well-known  and suitable 
bioremediators of organic detritus present in the benthic zone of pond . This micro organism,  it actually not naturally available , you have to prov ide them w ith 
artificially you have to provide them as along with the food additives. And you can generally 
mix it with the sand and clay and deposit  it in the pond bottom.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:57)  
 
What are the bioremediators for nitrogenous compounds ? Excessive a ccumu lation of nitrogen 
components say like ammonia or nitrate, what will happen , you know they are very much 
harmful , they can cause high amount of toxicity to your aquatic species rearing  fish and 
streams. Therefore, we go for this bioremediat ion of this  nitrogen compound , and what are 
the principal source of this ammonia , is the excretion and the sediment flux . 
And also , the bacterio logical nitrification is usually the most practical method for eliminating 
ammonia from closed aquaculture syste ms. In orde r to achieve this, what we need to do we 
need to provide the microorganisms like Nitrosomonas,  Nitro sococcus, Nitrosp ira, 
Nitroso vibrio , Nitrolobus , so, these kinds of microorganisms they are very much helpful , they 
are most important ammonia ox idizer and they we can get help us get rid of the presence of 
ammonia in o ur farm. 
It can also be achieved by sand or gravel by filters through which water is allowed to 
circulate or you can provide them with some biofilters made of some plastic bio medias  as 
well. S o, in  general, the bacteriological nitrification is the best method that you should go 
through to eliminate any amount of ammoni acal nitrogen present in your system.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:17)  
 
Further this Nitrosomonas bacteria we know that it  converts a mmoni a into nitrite and this 
nitrite can be converted into nitrate by the help of Nitrobac ter. These all are nitrifying 
organisms which works as in the presence of oxygen . And along with the production of 
nitrate , nitrification can also make the water acidi c which actually helps the facilitating the 
availability of different soluble materials.  
The produce d nitrate are then reduced to nitrogen gas by anaerobic microorganisms, this is 
called the denitrification phenomena . In this denitrification p henomenon differe nt denitrifiers 
are used, they actually help reducing the nitrate to nitrogen gas, this is a dinitrogen gas  to be 
precise, and they actually get dissolved to the atmosphere . Denitrify ing filters we use which 
support the growth of anaerobic  microorganisms o r denitrifiers to help this denitrification 
process.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:19)  
 
This is the whole system how it looks like . You see the nitrogenous organic waste matters, 
the unconsumed feed fecal matter , moults, dead algae, excretory  waste, etcetera.  Because of 
the presence of different heterotrophic microorganisms, it converts into the ammonia by the 
process of ammon ification . Then they work with the because of the presence of different 
nitrifying organisms they c onvert into nitrate, th is is the aerobic  process . 
Then nitrate to nitrogen, which is anaerobic denitrification process . Then this nitrogen will go 
to the atmosphere or this nitrate rich waste  water you can use it for algal nutrient or even for 
supplementar y for plant purposes , that is what we done in hydroponic systems , like you know 
aquaponic systems, this nitrogen rich wastewater has been fed to the hydroponic crops.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:00)  
 
So, that is a very standard way of doing that , so get rid of  the nitrogen and carbo naceous 
compound what  about  the phosphorus , phosphorus is mainly available in the living beings as 
phospholipid and the nucle oprotein . These bacteria  which produced the enzyme like 
phosphatase and the phytases  are actually generate p hosphorus in the form o f phosphate , PO 4. 
So, phosphorus is an important element in any deviation from the normal nitrate to phosph ate 
ratio is believed to influence the rate of nitrification or bacterial generation of phosphorus. 
So, this kind of microorga nisms , this kind of bac teria which can p roduce these enzymes are 
actually very much useful to bioremediate the phosphorus waste from the system.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:02)  
 
What about the hydrogen sulphide ? That is also another one of the nuisance or like  we should 
get rid of t his hydrogen sulphide because it can cause gill damage and some other diseases in 
fish. Unionized H2S is considered extremely toxic to the fish and may exist in both natural 
water and aquaculture f arms. Photosynthetic benthic bacteri a capable of breaking t his H 2S at 
the po nd bottom which we normally use it in aquaculture practices . 
This bacteria is very special because they can perform photosynthesis in anaerobic condition  
due to the presence of their bacteri o-chlorophyll that can abs orb light. So, this Chromatiaceae  
or thi s purple  sulphur bacteria  or the Chlorobiaceae  or we call them green circle bacteria , they 
are the two families of photosynthetic sulfur reducing bacteria that removes the sulphide  
under the anaerobic condition s.  
So, these are the very im portant , this bio remediation of hydrogen sulphide . This is why we 
should go ahead and this is one of the major reasons why we should go ahead  with this 
bioremediation of hydrogen sulphide . (Refer Slide Time: 14:13)  
 
Both this bacte rial families are m ass cultured and appl ied as one probiotic for the 
bioremediation of H2S toxicity . And these bacteria can be absorbed on the sand grains and 
suppl ied to ponds leading to the enrichment in the hypo limnion  and it can reduce the H2S 
toxicity  in general.  
(Refer Sli de Time: 14:37)  
 
So, we discuss about the bioremediation  of carbon compounds, nitrogen compounds, 
phosphorus compounds, and we also discuss about the bioremediation  of hydrogen sulphide  
as well. So, if we talk about what are the adv antages and the disadva ntages of bioreme diation,  
so it will give us a more clear idea about what is it ?  And how these disadvantages of the bioremediation  can also be troubleshooting the future , 
can be considered as future research activity and it has actu ally been done by exper ts from all 
over the world and they are working on it and how they can help us to get rid of this toxicity 
and help get rid of all these disadvantages of the bioremediation.  
I will discuss about it in coming slide. So, the advantages  of bioremediation,  it can work on 
diffe rent organic and inorganic compounds which is good , this is easy to implement because 
we need something because first of all this is biological , this is a living thing. We  are not 
dealing here with something which is  not living and which w ill be having som e drastical 
effect in the follow -up procedures or say like in a later in the near future, we are doing 
everything in biologically here . 
Most of the enzymatic extract that we get from this microorganisms  they are very  much 
organic in nature , and because of that, it is all because of this reason it is called 
bioremediation , it is far , far better than all the chemical remediation procedures  and all  the 
physical remediation procedures.  
It is also easy to maintain and can  be done both on -site a nd off -site. Like  suppose if I give 
you one example of another type of remediation processes like say limi ng, remember we 
discuss about liming,  why do we need liming, why it is helpful . Liming is you cannot do it 
on-site, even if you  do on-site liming, what will happen it will be very detrimental for your 
aquatic species that is rea ring at that moment. What you need to do ?  
You need to completely get rid of all the aquatic species , you need to clean the pond, then 
you have t o supply the li ming that is  the best way of doing liming, that once or  before the 
farm season started and you want to go ahead with the farming of particular area, you have to 
get it all the water from your pond , lime it , wait for 48 hours or so, an d then you do some 
continuous water ex change so to get ri d of any follow up events, follow up effects  of this  
liming , and then you can go ahead with it.  
So, it comes with a lot of disadvantages  but in case of bioremediation it is possible for on-site 
as we ll as off -site application . Definitely  it cost much , much , much lesser than other 
treatment units  and all, because you are  using some biological system only , biological living 
beings only which can be cultured and which can be supplied in a very small amou nt it will 
definitely once it will find its own  way find its own favorable condition it will grow drastically it will clean the zone, it will clean the condition in the natural , that is a unwanted 
conditions that is prevailing in your system.  
It can significantly improve the environment condition, it is actually  environment  friendly,  it 
is not having any , I would say like drastic effect in your pond system or your pond sediment . 
It is aesthetically pleasing, because when you do the bioremediation  you will get rid of all the 
unwanted materials which is like say floating condition that is  algal blooms , that is like you 
know this organic material  that will keep on increasing.  
So, it will cause drastic change in the foo d wave at the end it will cause the e utrophication. 
So, this bioremediation  helps you to make it aes thetically pleasing that means it is clean 
enough and good enough for you know , it gives you some aesthetic enhancement , it provides 
a beautification which actually helps us  and so aestheticall y pleasing. It decreases the amount 
of waste s needed  for the la ndfill.  
Suppose at the end of a culture period, you need to take the scrap the pond bottom up and you 
have to throw it somewhere for landfilling,  because you know you  are going to culture it 
again. So, this bioremediation will help you get rid o f this . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:35)  
 
You see why I have told you it is aesthetically pleasing . See the bioremediation once it is 
done before and after it is like so greenish in nature at the end you see it  looks so good it is 
like so clean blue water. In th e bottom also, you see before and after before it was like having 
like lot of obnoxious pollutants , this pollutant  level is drastically dropped down you can see in the after picture . So, that is how it lo oks like after the bioremediation is done that is ho w it 
looks like the before and after picture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:06)  
 
So, what are the disadvantages of bioremediation ? Bioremediation, there is always the other 
side of the coin, it is something like  that. In case of bioremediation, it may take severa l years 
to complete the bioremediation  process depending on the climatic conditions . It is restricted 
to the sites involving contamination near the roots that is also problem .  
The harvest ed plants are so metimes toxic, may be classified as hazardous waste because of 
presence of some unwanted biological components . So, sometimes the contaminated plants 
may be harmful. So, better to treat it properly, boil it properly and have it or go and ask the 
expert wha t to do with that , it may involve the harmful effect  on the foo d chain, but still it is 
better to go ahead with this bioremediation  process rather than waiting for your pond to 
completely die .  
Despite the fact that ammonia gets oxidized to a less toxic fo rm of nitrate by bioremediators , 
however, the pollut ion with ni trogenous metaboli tes is still by prevalent problems.  So, why I 
say so, because see the nitrate , suppose you somehow do the nitrification process and 
ammonia is converted into nitrate.  
But in the middle, if you remember the process , nitrificati on process correctly, ammonia is 
converted into nitrite first, then from nitrite , it converts into the nitrate, this nitrite is actually sometimes it stays in the system. And when it stays in the system , sometimes it can cause 
drastical harm to the system t o the unit , to the unit in general.  
And it has a lot of meta bolites it forms and th ese nitrogen meta bolites are also not good for 
our health good for in general, like for any follow up practices or any , it is not, it is not good 
at all to be frank.  
(Refer Slide Time : 21:55)  
 
So, what we have learned from this lecture material,  the conclusion that we can derive that 
the waste that is generated from the aquaculture includes the residual food, fecal  matter, 
residues of biocides and the biostats , metabolic byp roducts, t he waste produced during the 
moulting  of crustaceans , waste s generated from the collapsing algal blooms, the fertilizer 
derived waste . All these things cause a huge amount of pollution into the river water body  
and all . 
In order to get rid of it, what we c an do, we can use some kind of bioremediators . From the 
name itself, you can see the bio means it is a living organisms, it is like a living being or the 
extract of a living being, the extract of the byproduct of living , so that we can do and we can 
utiliz e this kind of these products for remediation of organic compounds, remediation of 
nitrogen compounds, phosphorus compounds, hydrogen sulphides and etcetera . 
And we also learned the adv antages and the disadvantages of bioremediators and how we can 
troubles hoot those disadvantages also we discussed in detail . We discuss the excessive 
accumulation of nitrogen compounds, it can deteriorate the water quality, we got to know that this toxicit y can be very harmful, very lethal to our fish and shrimps . So, that is  why we need 
to go ahead with this bioremediators . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:40)  
 
The different kinds of microorganisms like bacillus subtilis, bacillus cereus, bacillus 
coagulans , they ar e suitable by bioremediators for organic detritus . Bacteria like 
Nitros omon as, Nitro sococcus, Nitrosp ira, Nitroso vibrio , Nitrolobus , and all these bacteria  are 
very much important for fixing the nitrogen species , especially ammonia deoxidizer there .  
On the other hand, this Chroma tiaceae and this  Chlorobiaceae this two differ ent families of 
photosynthetic sulfur reducing bacteria are helpful for removing the sulphide  under anaerobic 
conditions.  So, all these things that we have learned that it is possible t o clean to , how to say 
like to somehow help get rid of the all the poll utants from the wastewater by using different 
bioremediation  techniques.  
So, this bioremediators  mainly the living organisms that we use and it can be easily cleaned. 
What are the othe r ways of doing that?  We know that in the case of recirculating aquacul ture 
systems, we use different treatment units like the primary treatment , secondary treatment , in 
the secondary treatment also actually it is kind of a biological treatment process the re also we 
introduced some essential microorganisms or helpful microorg anisms, which actually treats 
the waste by consuming it and converting into their biomass.  Then we go for this tertiary treatment units  where this can be done by UV or ozonati on and 
all these techniques . So, this is also one way of doing that. And this is also, bioremediation  is 
also another standard way of doing that. So that is it.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:30)  
 
These are the references that you can follow. I really wish you can , like it  woul d be better if 
you can take a picture and search it in the Google. So, you w ill get very detailed in -depth 
details about it and got to know more about the different bioremediation processes, and how 
it works in general. So , that is it for the  day. See you in the coming lecture. Thank you.  