 Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 46   
Green Aquaculture  
Hello everyone, welcome to the first lecture of module 10 technology of c leaner production. 
My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  I am from the Agricultural and F ood 
Engineering  Department of IIT , Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:37)  
 
In this particular lecture material, the concepts that we  will be covering  the introduct ion to the 
green agriculture, or aquaculture, the Aquaponics , Biofloc technology , phytotherapy  and bio 
fertilizers, we already actually in the last module, we have already gone through the Biofloc 
technology here, I will  just give you a very b rief details about it just to continuing with the 
green aquaculture systems like just to give you a basic idea about .  (Refer Slide Time: 1:06)  
 
Like aquaculture  sector, it is like one of the fastest growing proteinaceous food producing 
sector in this w orld right no w, with an annual average growth rate of around 6.2  percent  
response  since 2000 like with a very l esser capture fish production day by day. So, if you 
remember in the module 1, we discussed about how the capture fisheries, kind  of reducing 
and the culture fisheries gone increasing.  
So, at this moment, it is almost 50 50  percent . So, like, almost half of the fish reserve  when 
the fish production, aquaculture species production is actually done by culture fisheries and 
rest of the  half by the ca ptured fisher ies. And it keep on increasing this aquaculture this 
culture fisheries is keep on increasing, there is a like, country wise data shows that some of 
the countries they want to go to complete aquaculture practices already there are  a couple of 
countries actu ally already reached and couple of them are willing to reach by 2030 or 20 35.  
So in general , aquaculture though we talk about it, like, it is a very how does it is very holy 
systems like where we can have we can like it can provide us with th e all the bas ic nutrients 
that is possible and not only all the basic nutrients, I would like, definitely not say this, but I 
would say like more of a proteinaceous nutrients and how it can also provide a livelihood to 
the local communities and all .  
Howev er, it come s with some detrimental effects . So, as we already know, like couple of 
them, we already discussed in earlier modules, that I think you guys are already explored 
about it like what are the consequences, what are the cons part of this aquaculture  practices? So, first of all the effluent discharge is really something to worry about the disease spread , the 
degradation of genetic resources, the use of feet, the generation of pollutants and the 
environmental impact all in all together.  
So, first of a ll, the efflu ent like why effluent which has been generated from this kind of fish 
processing industry or say  aquaculture practices are kind of creating a nuisance to the 
environment, because this pollutants are like , it is like very high nitrogen componen t and it 
need s to be treated.  
And if we do not  introduce any proper wastewater treatment practice like proper nitrogen 
removal techniques, it can cause high environmental impact on the receiving water bodies. 
And this aquaculture practices, it ne eds a huge amount of f resh water intake and also 
freshwater research and moreover, in order to troubleshoot this kind of problems, we go 
ahead with the identify solutions, like recircul atory aquaculture systems.  
So, altogether these problems are s till there and people and researchers  and experts all over 
the world, they are working on it like how to get rid of all this problems and how we can find 
out some solutions which will provide some sustainability in this matter, all this technology, 
which a ctually provide us this proper  sustai nability, like well adhere  to the sustainability 
issues. We call them green aquaculture techniques.  
So all these green aquaculture techniques, if you remember the Biofloc  technology that we 
discussed in the last module , that is one type of green aq uacultu re technology, why it is called 
Green aquaculture technology. First of all, we do not  have to worry about the resource, we do 
not have to worry about much of a resources here .  
Because the water consumption is very can we minimize the resource the u se of f eed can we 
minimize in case of Biofloc technology to remember the microbial feed that is generated 
while treating  the pollutant is actually the considered as a feed for your aquatic species or the 
rearing fishes and so this way you we can reduce the  overal l environmental impact we can 
reduce the water uptake, we can reduce the energy utilization in general if we can provide if 
we can corporately optimize the system.  
So, this way, we can actually reduce overall environme ntal impact. So, that is the r eason w e 
call them green aquaculture technique. This lecture and  in the follow of lectures of this 
module will discuss more about all this green aquaculture techniques, and I hope you will be benefited out of it. So, in genera l and nowadays people are incr easing their investment in the 
green technologies and like it is supporting its development and raising the awareness among 
the industries and consumers .  
And is actually the one of the key approach for complete transition to the green aquaculture 
all over  the wo rld and especially in Indian scenario, we definitely need to focus on that.  
(Refer Slide Time: 5:47)  
 
 
In general, the green aquaculture it can be defined as a systems where which involves the 
benefits of green chem istry and environmental scienc e, whic h performs the environmental 
monitoring via application of different electronic devices or like model simulations, we can conserve the natural environment and the resources we can curb and minimize the negative 
impact on human environment and  all.  
If you  realize that I have already discussed th ese 4 in the previous slide like how just giving 
an example like how Biofloc technology doing the same thing, how Biofloc technology is 
actually helping us to go for this gr een aquaculture producer. So, in gen eral, not only this 
green  technology, this kind of green aquaculture technology can also reduce the level of 
carbon dioxide emissions in comparison to the conventional aquaculture techniques.  
Why so, if you realize the if we reduce the amount of water upt ake, i f we reduce the amount 
of feed uptake, if you can reduce the amount of energy requirement all these things comes 
with certain amount of carbon footprint , is not  it? So all these carbon footprint can be utilized 
can be reduced if you go ahead with thi s kind  of green aquaculture technology .  
It can be applied in various practices in aquaculture first, say like environmental friendly feed 
production disease preventive measures, different low impact and fuel efficient f ishing 
methods, you can go ahead wit h the reduced energy uses and transition for sustainable energy  
sources . What are the transition to sustainable energy sources ?  
Say the renewable energy source . You can go ahead with the proper solar roofing you can go 
ahead with the wind energy you can g o ahead with t he geothermal energy. So all this in a 
different types of renewable energies you can utilize in your farm to increase your production 
plus you can you can reduce the overall energy impact overall enviro nmental impact to the 
surrounding vicini ty.  
Also shift  to the greener refrigeration technology , if you realize the most of the water most of 
the like one of the major reason why we go for this always this freshwater exchange or we 
can provid e them all the water because with time water gets evap orated right. Suppo se you 
have a fish field or suppose you have a fish field come say like a crop field.   
What will happen to this field , first of all from the crop how the water gets evaporated  
because  of the action called transpiration from the leaves th e water gets evapor ated that is  
called transpiration . In case of pond body or in case of water body, it is evaporation. So, this 
combined effect of this transpiration and evaporation we call them evapot ranspiration .  There is a , there is the concept we cal l it like, in order  to reduce this evapotranspiration 
issues, evapotranspiration losses, and which is actually one of the major reason why we need 
to keep on adding water into the system into our farm , is not  it? So, this loss can be 
minimized, if we can g o ahead with some w ater condensing structure.  
Water condensing structure means, I mean like it is not water condensing structure, some 
crystallization techniques, it is just some means, you can capture  the moisture present in the 
air atmosphere and you ca n condens e it in th at water that clean water, you can again put it 
back to your farm.  
So, this is happening the technology is already there, you just need to need to provide a 
proper refrigeration unit  where the air the evapotranspirated water from your f arm. Suppose it 
is a closed bound technology like say like poly house or like in a normal clean house. So, 
what will happen the evapotranspirated  water can be collected in your air conditioning unit 
and the water will get con densed if you  design it correct ly.  
And then this water , this moisture which is converted into the condensed water that can be 
throw , that can be put it back to your farm to your po nd. So this way, you can kind  of 
reutilize the water  like more and more so water losses will be drasticall y reduced. Moreover , 
this refrigerant technologies it requires huge amount of energy , so how can you say that it is a 
you are  using this kind of huge energy consumption because I am consuming unit .  
And just to get it help you to remove or reduce the water  consumption that i s why we need to 
go ahead with a greener refr igeration technology . What do I mean by greener refr igeration 
technology ? I think you guys already know like earlier days we used to use t his the ceramic 
this we call it like a small drum or s omething this ceram ic drums or this mu d made drums or 
the soil made drums, what happens there because of their certain capacity .  
Because there is some small water channels present in this membrane like  structure in their 
body, because of that water channe ling is happening i n a very slow rate and the water gets 
evaporated from its surface and because of that, the water inside of it can be easily cooled 
down. So, this is an efficient technology that is be ing used for like 100 of years earlier when 
before the  refrigeration unit  actually being developed.  
So, why not we use this fundamentals, why not we use this funda  and we can develop our 
farm in such a way that it will create a certain like ins ide tempera ture can be much cooler than outside you can have thes e like bottle like structure which are nowadays ma de in  
African regions what they do to increase to reduce the temperature inside the house, you can 
use small bottles, we know this bottles, the bigger s ize bigger mouth will be the outer side .  
And the smal ler mouth  will be t he inner side because of the chang e in surface area the 
pressure drops and because of that there is a chances of the cooler air inside your chamber 
that is just to give you an example , you can go ahead with a geothermal energy . Geotherma l 
energy if you use  it, you can always maintain the temperature inside your farm at a certain 
level .  
Because geothermal energy is very easy to design you just put your, like this geothermal unit 
almost  20 to 25 feet below the ground, where the temperature  is always same no matter what 
whatever the fluctuations happening over the surface, but inside that and that level, the 
temperature is always same, almost same.  That temperature if you can mimic in you r system 
in your unit or your farm, that is  it you do not have to this is  the greener  refrigeration  
technologies .  
Still you may need refrigeration, suppose you are  from an equator region or so  differently the 
amount of the temperature outside i s pretty high. So, in that case, you may need some 
refrigeration  in it, but the load in  those refrigeration  unit can be drastically minimized if you 
go ahead with this kind of geothermal energy or a structural modification for your farms .  
I hope you under stand like, why the greener refrigeration technologies are mentio ned in order 
to go for  greener  aquaculture in general . More efficient and environmentally friendly waste 
management system has to be developed. Definitely, and because that is one of the majo r 
issues for your rearing  aquatic species plus all the resource r ecovery.  
So the techn ologies like Aquaponics , Biofloc technology, phytotherapy and biofertilizers are 
some of the most important green technologies incorporated into the modern aquaculture 
systems. And I am going to discuss about all these things in this particular lecture. Ho wever, 
I want you guys to g ive more elaborated lecture on A quaponics .  
This is a very high end technology which is coming up all over the world and it will generate 
a huge amount of I would say employment opportunity in Indian context  in near future. So, 
this Aquaponics I want to discuss more in details in the coming lecture though in this lecture, 
I will  just give a brief about all th ese 4  technologies , 4 greener aquacul ture technology just to give you some idea about why it is called  greener technology , greener aquaculture 
technology .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:17 )  
 
First to start with the Aquaponics systems, I hope what is hydroponics? Right Hydroponics is 
the culturing  of crops, different kinds of crops, agriculture crops, without the  presence of soil . 
So, we  can provide it with the proper nutrient media, you can provide it with some porous 
media. So, this nutrient media will provide the water along with this nutrient med ia will 
provide enough amount of nutrient possible for the growth  of your crop .  
So, that is the hydroponic system it can be elevated,  normally we put it in the elevated 
ground, you can do it in the ground itself, you can do it vertical  hydroponics. So, ho wever, 
the requirement of the growth media is one of the major co ncern in hydroponic syste m, 
whereas aquaculture in aquaculture one of the major aquaculture if you do it in a tank if you 
do it in a pond, it is okay but one of the major nuisances is the was tewater that it generates , is 
not it?  
Because this wastewater co ntains a huge amount of n itrogen nutrient , nitrogen rich polluted . 
This nitrogen rich pollutant normally ammonia cal in nature. So, what happens to the 
ammonia cal nitrogen ? How you can utilize  this nitrogen , this nitrogen rich wastewater . 
Somehow if we can convert it to the some mo re crop friendly nitrogen spaces say like nitrate, 
then this nitrate can be supplied to your , nitrogen rich wastewater can be supplied to your 
hydroponic system and t he plant will consume the nitrate from the wastewater and all the  
other nutrients that is present there, it will consume it or it will convert it to its biomass.  By this way, the water can be treated right because the pollutant load gets depleted when the  
hydroponic system the plant consume it through the root system . At the end, the water whi ch 
you are getting out of this hydroponic systems are free of this kind of obnoxious pollutants 
alone. Now, you can again put it back to your aquaculture po nd. So, th is way are symbiotic, a 
technology can be developed, which works in agglomeration with aqu aculture and 
hydroponics systems, as we are using aquaculture technique and hydroponic systems.  
In short, we call them aquaponic system. It is a type of organic hydr oponic or bioponics 
system also, because we use we do not  use the  chemically induced this feed and all or 
hydroponic solution whether we use aquaculture wastewater, so that is  why we call them 
organic hydroponics system , one type of organic hydroponics.  
So I hope you realize that what is Aquaponics  system, and I am again telling you that this is 
the future farming system, the future lies in this kind of technologies. It is gone, like it is not 
like I would  not say like it is gone gone, but it is really gon e to that soil based agriculture 
systems nowadays  because of majo r anthropogenic activitie s and that especially the 
crunching in the land area, the climate behavior got like drastically changed.  
It is not in our hand  anymore, and the seasonal variability i s like, very horrible situation right 
now, because of the global warming and not . All this  matter can be solved and all this matter 
can drastically affect your crop and drastically affect your food source, how it can be solved ? 
It can be solved with the hy droponic systems, it can be solved with this vertical farmi ng units, 
it can be solved by t hese kinds of Aquaponics  systems .  
And not only it will be solved, but it will give you high yield,  high livelihood  like high 
economic benefit, which  can provide you some employability opportunity to your nearby 
region. So, all tog ether this is something s ustainable one kind of very well sustainable 
solution for and also  we call them we can call them like proper green aquaculture 
technologies , Aquaponi cs systems .  (Refer Slide Time: 18:33)  
 
 
In general this, it serves as a model  of sustainable food prod uction by following the principle 
of what as I discussed, the waste which is generated from the aquaculture systems serves a  
nutrient for the hydroponic  system, the generated water is reused and recycled it after the 
biological fil tration and integration of  aquaculture and hydroponics results in increasing in 
the diversity and it yields multiple product .   
Other than that,  production of the foo d locally provides the access to healthy food and also i t 
boost th e local economy. General ly the nutrient like generated  from the fish, fecal waste 
decomposition of fish feed , algae , manure or  contaminants, that would otherwise build up 
toxic levels that c an, but it can be supplied to the hydroponic systems they will consume it 
and this nitroge n rich effluent acts as a fert ilizer for growing your plants .  The hydroponic beds sometimes can act as a bio filter, which remove  the residual ammonia 
nitrite nitrate, phosphorus or recirculate the purified water back into the fish tank. However, 
sometime s if you only having this nutr ient media, so, in that case, you need to provide a 
biofilter beforehand, it would be better to provide a biofilter beforehand with the proper 
nitrifying organisms . What it will do ?  
It will convert the ammonia present in your  wastewater like fish … this aq uaculture 
wastewater into nitrate because of the nitrification technique . Now this nitrate nitrogen, NO 3 
negative it will be yo u can provide it to your hydroponics and it will increase your yield and 
it will act as a source of  nutrient.  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:13 )  
 
Second greener technology Biofloc technology I am not going into details about this, because 
we have already discuss ed in a lecture material in last module. So, this Biofloc technology is 
also one type of greener te chnology because why because w ater uses is minimum, the Biofloc  
that is generated Biofloc means like the microorganisms, this heterotrophic microorganisms  
which are consuming the wastewater it will make it into their biomass.  
So, it increases the biomass and that Biomass  concentration  that biomass is actually being fed 
by the fish again or say like your aquatic species again. So, this way th ere is a nice organic 
cycle is like generated and what it happens like it will it will reduce the water consumption, it 
will reduce t he food requirement for your fish.  Only in certain cases you have to provide it with a supplementary feed but most of the cases 
the Biofloc technology provides ample feed and also it is lightweight and it is very healthy 
for and also healt hy and also it c an replace the fish meal and fish oil which is like one of the 
major concern and whole world like all the aquaculture speci alists are working on the 
technologies that can be developed or feed that can be developed .  
That can replace fish me al, because you do not  go ahead with the culturing fish by providing 
them fishmeal for that you need another culture of fish and that cultu re of fish, it will cost 
you a lot or otherwise you have to go for capture fisheries. So, both the cases is detriment al. 
So, aquacult ure can only be called Sustainable when the feed requirement can be sustainably 
handled like in this particular case , in ca se of Biofloc technology .  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:01 )  
 
What is the third one like phytotherapy from the name itself,  I think you hav e understood like 
phytotherapy means this different compounds like phenolics, flavonoids , polysaccharides and 
proteoglycans  and all these kind of compounds can be harvested from the herbal extracts that 
can use for different use different p urposes of in aq uaculture, this herbal extract, which are 
now like you can extract from this herbals.  
I mean , like from different pl ants and all that can be well utilized for disease control , that can 
be well utilized for healthy outcome from your fish. So , this is called  as that is why it is 
called phytotherapy . Just to give you one example, in Penaeus monodon, it has this vibri osis 
this disease. So, this vibriosis is can be controlled by herbs  like this andrographolide  
paniculat e or this P corylifolia  or S triblobatum .  So these are the some of the herbs which can be utilizable  which is found suitable for 
controlling vibrio sis in Penaeus monodon . Certain bioactive molecules like azadirachtin, 
peperine, allicine have been re ported to be effective against a rgulus and the ich parasi tes. So I 
think you know where we find this allicine like, so different kinds of plant extr acts 
azadirachtin , so, these are found in different kinds of plant extracts like turmeric . So this you 
can use this allicine  and you can use it for regulating this k ind of disease causing reason.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:58 ) 
 
So, in general, the phyt otherapy and its nano formulation as disease management in 
aqua culture systems if you see the fish, like first is turmeric and all different kinds o f plants 
are used their extract or herbal diet mixture or biotic compounds are provided as a doses or 
you can provide it as pellets so on along with the pellets along with the fee d, you can provide 
it to your fish.  
So, it will help in disease management, it will help to go ahead with the anti -helminthes, anti-
protozoa n activity , anti -microbial property , in immunostimulant also, it will increase the 
lysosome it will increase the phagocytic cells , it will increase the leukocyte cells, it will 
increase the ma crophages and antibody.  
So, what will happen because of the increment of this particular cellular par ts it will increase 
the capacity of sustaining in a harsh  situation, and it can choose to fight against the disease . 
So that is  why we provide these we ca ll them phytotherapy.  (Refer Slide Time: 25:10)  
 
So, what is the mechanisms that involves in gener al say like when we supplied with the 
flavonoids, saponins , terpenoids alkaloids and phenolics or th e glyco sites or tannins 
component.  This phytotherapy in aquaculture  they provid e, if suppose you are  attacked by a 
bacteria, when you increase the phagocyto sis… increase the production of phagocytosis what 
will happen is this phagocytes cell they consume this increase in the oponization,  what is 
oponization?  It increases capacity to target a particular bacterial cell .  
It increases the lysosome presence. So, by increment of all this cellular organisms, cellular 
targets , cellular products, it will help get rid of the bacteria, how we get rid of the viruses, it 
sees the replication of v iruses, this kind of phytotherapy, that is  why it is used for seizing the 
replication of viruses, how the fungi attack can be minimized, it altered the protein synthesis 
or protein in general  we call it the protein inhibition in ca se of fungi.  
So, by this way, and also it act  as a immunostimulant it switch on the upregulation of 
immunostimulatory genes . By all this means it helps your aquatic species to act against your 
disease causing microorganisms or say in general it will incre ase their health . It cause a huge 
amount of health y benefits to your systems.  
So, that is  why we need  to focus on these kinds of technologies which will give you a 
production organically strength and  you do not  have to provide some any additional chemical  
things, but rather all the se chemicals extract from the biological components I mean like this 
resynt hesis procedure can be utilized and it can be used for the medicinal purpose .  (Refer Slide Time: 27:11 ) 
 
What is the bio fertilizers ? Because the conti nuous uses of these inorgan ic fertilizers it can 
contribute to the eutrophication and also it can dras tically affect the health of the fish and fish 
consuming humans in that case . How we can overcome this we can go ahead with the organic 
manures o r bio fer tilization . What is this or ganic manures or  bio fertilizer ?  
I think you all know about it in mostly m ost of the cases the bio fertilizers like nitrogen fixing 
bacteria, Azolla,  nitrogen fixing cyanobacteria , phosphate solubilizing bacteria , phosphatase 
producing bacteria and enrich ed compost are commonly used in aquaculture. So, these are the 
fertilizers these are the bio fertilizers that is used to enrich the overall natural , supplementary 
natural supplementary available to your system to your like, it is like a natural compost to 
your unit to your farm .  (Refer Slide Time: 28:32)  
 
So, these are the th ings that we need to focus on this 4 technologies nowadays people are 
using like just to give you an example of general technology, these are the 4 differ ent 
technologies that I can  discuss you about and there are plenty of more, I really expect you to 
go and find out, go and study some of them and just Google it about the remote greener 
technology that will definitely give you a much wider knowledge , much better idea about 
what it i s exactly all about .  
So, in conclusion, our increasing concern about, effl uent discharge , disease spread, all this 
generation of pollutants and environmental  impacts are responsible for the emergence of 
green aquaculture . Bioflo c technology nutrie nts can be continuously reused and recycled in 
the culture medium, enabling the min imum to zero water discharge due to the emergence of 
new antibiotic resistance , bacterial strains .  
And also due to the harmful effects that residual anti biotics present in farmed aquatic 
organisms may have so aquatic farmers now have shifted their f ocus towards herbal extracts 
to treat different diseases in fishes.  Continuous uses of inorganic fertilizers can contribute to 
eutrophication  and that is  why we  need to focus on organic fe rtilizers or the bio fertilizers in 
general.  (Refer Slide Time: 29 :39)  
 
 So, what are the takeaway? We should increase the investment in the greener  technology 
supporting its development and raising awareness is one of the m ajor issue nowadays we 
have to go ahead with this . Aquaponics , we know about the  Aquaponics , very basic about the  
Aquaponics in the coming lecture I will  discuss more about what is Aquaponics , how it 
works.  
Biofloc technology we discuss about it we discus s about how different plant extracts like the 
different components like phenolics , flavonoids, p olysaccharides proteoglycans  can play a 
vital role in preventing and reducing the microbial infections in general . Biofertilizers like 
nitrogen fixing bacteria,  this enriched compost can n ormally we used in aquaculture and it is 
very much famous nowadays. And this can increase your production in a very sustainable 
manner.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:32)  
 
So, all this technology that we discussed today is mostly the  sustainable ones and that i s why 
it is called a greener aquaculture . So, when we talk about gre ener aquaculture , these are the 
technology that we talked about, you can go ahead with this reference to get more 
information regarding this technology , regardi ng green  aquaculture.  
So, i n the coming lecture, in the second lecture, we of this model will m ajorly been focusing 
on the Aquaponics  systems smart Aquaponics  system . Why we name it smart Aquaponics  
system we  will discuss in general . So, thank you so much . See you in the coming lect ure. 