Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Lecture  56 
Topic  - Impact of Climate  Change  on Aquaculture  
Hello  everyone,  welcome  to the first lecture  of the module  12 Environmental  consideration  of 
aquaculture . So, in this particular  lecture,  I will be discussing  about  the impact  of climate  
change  on aquaculture  and it will be followed  up by the next lecture  video  as well.  My name  
is Professor  Gourav  Dhar Bhowmick , I am from  the Agricultural  and Food  Department  of IIT 
Kharagpur.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:53) 
 
In this particular  lecture  video,  I will be covering  mainly  the introduction  to the effect  of 
climate  change  on aquaculture,  different  negative  or and the positive  effects  of or the impacts  
of rising  temperature  on aquaculture,  oceanic  acidification  of on aquaculture  and diseases  and 
harmful  algal  blooms  on aquaculture.  Other  than these  three  different  topics,  I will discuss  
about  more  on different  more  on you know , more  like some  other  climate  change  criteria,  
which  has some  drastically  effect  on the aquaculture,  but it will be done  on the following  
lecture  only okay .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:26) 
 
So, in order  to start with, you kn ow that the climate  chang e is not something  new that we are 
discussing  today  right . So, it is there  and we are discussing  now it is in a very you know , how 
to say like it is already  there,  we know  it from  like our school  days that the climate  change  is 
happening  and it is because  of mainly  climate  change  is something  that it happens  naturally  
also, but we are actually  kind of you know, accelerating  it by different  anthropogenic  
activities .  
Because  we were  trying  to do something  which  is against  the nature , we are trying  to do 
some thing  which  is you kn ow not supposed  to be done  by natur ally in this timeframe . But we 
are doing  it when  accelerating  this process  and somehow,  we some  sometimes  will decelerate  
some  process  as well.  
So, both of the cases,  we actually  make  a drastic  impac t on the environment  and that because  
of that there  is a chance  of changes  in the climate . So, this is actually  one of the major  risks , 
considering  the global  food production,  and also it has a very significant  threat  to the quality  
and the quantity  of the production  of agricultural  products  and aquaculture  products.   
In general,  when  we talk about  the climate  change,  it does,  there  is a difference  between  
climate  and weather  right yo u know it right? . It like from  our basic  geographical  knowledge,  
geography  knowledge,  that the climate  change,  it is actually  a statistical  distribution  of 
weather  over a particular  period  of time over an extended  period  of time okay , it can be 
decades  to millions  of years . So, that is what  we call climate  change  okay .  So, this climate  change,  it affects  the aquaculture  in both direct  as well as indirect  ways  okay , 
what  will be the direct  effect  and what  is actually  the direct  effects  that is still actually  in the 
aquaculture  sector  is facing  nowadays,  whether  it be freshwater  aquaculture,  whether  it be 
marine  aquaculture  and all. Is the physiology  of finfish  and the shell fish stocks  are getting  
influenced  because  of these  changes  in the climate  condition  and all.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:38) 
 
It also drastically  affects  its produc tion systems  and which  actually  implies  that your 
aquaculture  production  will be hampered,  if there is it is in continuous  effect  of the climate  
change  and all okay .  
What  are the different  indirect  effects  they are associated  with aquaculture ? First and the 
changing  in the primary  and the secondary  productivity . What  do I mean  by the primary  and 
the secondary  productivity ? That in the food chain  when  we have  this food pyramid  in the 
bottom  level,  we have  certain , animal  certain  species  of animal  or plant  whatev er it is. Then  
in the second  there  will be some  second  tropic  there  will be like some  other  species which  
normally  sustained  by the help of the species  which  is there  in the bottom  most . Likewise,  it 
will go and go on go for right? .  
So, this change  in the climat ic situation  can drastically  affect  this bottom  most  layer  and the 
top like second  bottom  or like say like third  bottommost  layer  okay . So, these  layers  are like 
kind of a building  block  for all the other  for the food chain.  And once  these basic building  
blocks  are missing,  the food chain  will like, the foundation  of this food chain  will collapse  
and it will drastically  affect  the whole  ecosystem  isn’t?  So, because  of that it is like a kind of an indirect  affect.  So, by means  of this aquacultur e will 
also be affected  because  they will not get enough  food for the species  to survive,  because  for 
them  the food is this primary  and the secondary  produce  right .  
So, once  they are missing  the aquaculture  growth  will be drastically  sublime . So, this is the 
reason  and also it can change  the overall  structure  of the ecosystem  as I already  discussed  and 
it can also affect  the input supplies,  the product  prices,  fish oil and fish meal  because  if the 
fish oil and fish meal  is normally,  we collected  from  the capture  fisheries  in general . Still 
now,  it is the like one of the major  in a way of getting  fish meal  and fish oil is the capture 
fisheries . There  is small  fishes  like you know anchovies  and all.  
So, this is the one that once  because  of the climatic  chang es which  situation  because  of this 
drastic  change  in the environmental  situation  and all. The capture  fisheries  will be affected  
and once  the capture  fisheries  is affected,  they will get the less catch  definitely  that will affect  
the whole  aquaculture  system as well okay , you understand  how they are, related  to each 
other . Not only that, it also drastically  affects  the other  goods  and servi ces needed  by the 
fisherman  and also aquaculture  producers  and all okay .  
In general,  the climate  change  effects  on the aquaculture  it includes  the rising  in tempera ture, 
ocean  acidification , disease  and the harmful  algal  blooms,  changes  in the precipitation  or say 
like rainfall  pattern .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  6:36) 
  
Global  sea level  rise because  of this greenhouse  effect  and all, changes  in the sea surface  
salinity,  uncertainty  in the external  input  supply,  like agriculture  and all and also severe  
climatic  even ts. All these  topics  are very much  influenced  because  of very much  it can 
drastically  influence  the aqua culture .  
So, we will be discussing  about  the first three today  okay . The rising  temperature  ocean  
acidification  and the diseases  and harmful  algal  blooms,  all the follow  up effects  will be 
discussed  in the coming  lecture  video  okay .  
Primary  production  of the ocean  have  been  projected  to decline  by 3 to 9 percent  is by 2100  
due to this climate  changes . Can you imagine  this just realize  the fact that because  popula tion 
explosion  is happening  right? . So, in any way the amount  of people  the amount  of supply  is 
keep  on amount  of, demand  is keep  on increasing .  
But the supply , if by the end of this century,  if it will be declined  by 3 to 9 percent  as of this 
from  the oceanic  primary  production  from  the ocean . It will have  a very drastic  influence  in 
the food chain,  there  is a chance  of drastic  effect  in the whole  ecosystem  because  of this 
reason . How  they there  is a chance  like there  will be high famine  and, the high rise in the 
food and all food prices  will rise like anything , it is like even  it is actually  happening . It is do 
not worry  about  it is not something  far future  thing  that we are discussing  about .  
It is actually  happening  all over the world  right  now,  the food price s are keep  on increasing  
like anything  unless  until we try to think  about  the alternat es. If you remember  we discussed  
couple  of very fine alternative  methods  of aquaculture  and aquaculture  based  agriculture  in 
our lecture  in this in different  lecture  modules  in this series  of lecture .  So, if you remember  all those  methods  like aquaponics  like we discuss a particular  
hydroponics  and all, we discuss  about  the seaweed , we discuss  about  the pearl  crabs . So, the 
sea ranching,  aqua  ranching  and all these  processes  are having  you know  very high potential  
to be the future  of the human  food production  and all.  
Because  unless  until we think  about  the alternatives  or unless  and until we think  about  how to 
replenish  the environment  that we already  destroy  okay  like the in case of in this particular  
case this because  of the climate  change  that is happening  due to the anthropogenic  activity  
and because  of that this global  change  and all those  things .  
Unless  other  unless  and until we change,  we change  our way of leading  life unless we change  
the reduce  the carbon  footprint  of our system  like what  the whether  it be your municipality,  
whether  it be your industry,  whether  it be your aquacu lture farm  or whether  it be livestock  
farm  or agriculture,  whatever.  Each  and every  individual  things  have  their own carbon  
footprint.   
They  have  their carbon  demand  and all which  has to be reduced.  Think  about  forget  about  
reducing  now think  about  the how to do it, Carbon  like you know  then like do it negative , like 
rather  than your being  you like I would  say in this particular  sense  you can even  say your 
carbon  positive  means . We know some  countries  are there  which  are actually  fighting  like 
anything  in this sense . So, your moto  will be you will be producing  more  amount  of 
sustainable  gaseous  sustainable  like say like more  amount  of oxygen .  
And I say like, if you have  a proper  refere nce suppose  like carbon  dioxide  if you can 
consume  the carbon  dioxide  is much  higher  than the production  of carbon  dioxide  that is 
what  our goal is okay . Like Bhutan,  Bhutan  is I think  one of the first country  in the world  
which  produces  which  consume  more  amount  of carbon  dioxide  from  the atmosphere,  then 
the amount  of carbon  dioxide  that they are generating  from  their country,  we have  to take it 
as you know as a   kind of example  or something,  we have  to idolize  this kind of behavior  all 
over the world . 
How we can reduce  this kind of drastic  climatic  effect  by changing  our human  behavior  and 
changes  in some  production  level  and all these  things  anyway . So, that is what  we need  to do 
as soon  as possible  because  the clock  is ticking  and 2100  is like even  a very far estimate . It 
can be happened  before  that also in you or your future  generation  will be drastically  
hampered  by that okay . (Refer  Slide  Time:  11:10 ) 
 
So, in general,  if you see this representation,  you will get an idea about , how this all these  
systems  are actually  interrelated  aquaculture,  agriculture,  climate  changes  and all. In the aqua  
culture  production , it produces  carbon  dioxide,  methane,  nitrogen  dioxide  and all, nitrous  
oxide  and all.  
And this nitrogen  base oxide  is this greenhouse  gases  like this methane  and carbon  dioxide,  it 
actually  increases  the greenhouse  gas with the amount  of greenhouse  gases in the atmosphere.  
It can definitely  changes  the climate  in the long run. And it definitely  affect s the agriculture  
production  in the whole .  
So, it is like a circular  thing  like once  you are not maintaining  the temperature,  you are not 
maintaining  a sustain able production  method,  you are not maintaining  this sustainability,  
definitely  it will increase  the production  of greenhouse  gases  which  will which  will affect  the 
climate  change,  which  will affect  the whole  your agriculture  production  as well.  
It will also affect  the capture  fisheries  and because  of the effect  on the capture  fisheries,  it 
will reduce the aquafeed  ingredients  which  is like fish meal  or say like fish oil. So, if the fish 
meal  and fish oil is reduced,  the whole  aquaculture  production  will also be hampered . So, 
once  it is hampered,  it will also you know  started  reducing  because  of that there  is a reduction  
in the amount  of food availability  and all. All together  whole  system  will be drastically  
affected  like the agriculture  production,  aquaculture  production  will be reduced  like anything  
because  of these  changes  in the climate  and because  of our unsustainable  farming  practices  
and all.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:14 ) 
 
I will discuss  about  these  three  points  as I discussed  as I told you, like the what  are there  
impacts  negative  and the positive  impact  on aquaculture . So, first to start with,  let us discuss  
about  the rising  in temperat ure. I hope  I do not have  to go through  much  more  in details  
because  I am 100 percent  sure you all know  the fact that how this rising  temperature  can 
affect  the aquaculture . Especially  the reason  like why the rising  the temperature  is happening  
because  of the climate  change.   
Anyway,  so let us discuss  about  the negative  impact  first, you know  the fish is normally  they 
are Poikilothermic  in nature . What  do I mean  by the Poikilothermic ? That means,  they do not 
have  the capacity  to control  their own body  tempe rature,  their body  temperature  is completely  
relied on the external  temperature  or the external  environment  okay . So, definitely  they do 
not have  the accessibility  they do not have  this capacity  to control  their own body  regulation  
this heat regulation  system and all. Because  of that, they are highly  sensitive  in even  minor  
temperature  variations  and all okay .  
This thermal  stress  can lead to increased  mortality  for the cold-water  fishes  because  like 
Salmon,  Atlantic  halibut  and this Cod and all and also the intertidal  shellfish . They normally  
cannot  sustain  higher  temperature , they normally  prefer  to have  it in a temperate  region  and 
stay in the temperate  region  with much  less temperature  than like in general  the much  less 
temperature  around  say like on an average  8 to 17, 18 degrees  Celsius  or something  like that. If it goes above  that it will be in a stress  condition  which  will lead to different  kinds  of 
reduction  in the reproduction  level  reduction  in the overall  the biomass  production  and all of 
those  things. Overall  production  will be hampered,  it can lead to the change  in the 
metabolism,  the physiology,  the feeding  behavior , the growth  perform ance of most  finfish as 
well as the shellfish  species.   
This temperature  variation  also led to the thermal  stratification  in this deep -water  system  and 
which  affects  the distribution  and the abundance  of nutrients  in the water.  And what  will 
happen  if the distribution  and the abundance  of nutrient  in the different  water  level  is 
different ? It will change  it reduce  it can affect  severely  the aquaculture  farmers  who is 
operating  on the open  water  like what  do I mean  with open  water ? Say like they go to the 
open sea, in the open  sea we are having  this particular  type of pen or cage culture  or like 
simpl y we go to go and do the capture  fisheries  and all.  
Because  of the change  in the temperature  variations,  this nutrient  abundance  will also vary it 
will not be available  in the upper  stratum . So, it will go to second  or third  stratum  of the 
water  and becau se of that the species  which  normally  dwell  there  their amount  will be 
reduced  and which  will definitely  affect  the aquaculture  farmers  okay . It can also decrease  
the dissolved  oxygen  level .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:24 ) 
 
Like if you increase  the temperature  DO will decrease , because  if you increase  the 
temperature  all the dissolved  oxygen  will get vaporized . So, we will get in contact  with 
bubble  make  this bubble  form  and it will go into go in contact  with the atmosphere  and all . So, it is I mean  like see, in general  that if you increase  the temperature  the gas diffusivity  will 
decrease  right . So, it is like the same  if you increase  the temperature  differently  the oxygen  
level  will reduce  which  will affect  I do not have  to say it right which  will how it can affect  
the all the living system  present  in your aquatic  system  and all okay .  
Also , the expansion  of the oxygen  minimum  zone , say, in both coastal  and offshore  areas,  it 
can decrease  the vertic al migration  depth  for some  species  like tuna and billfishes,  they 
normally  go for you know , they normall y have  these  vertical  habitat  systems  they go up 
turns , up in the surface  and then they go back  again  to have  some  food and then they are 
going  to for phytoplan kton sand and they go back  again . So, just to giving  some  examples , 
so, this vertical  expansion  of their this habitat  is getting  compressed  because  of the changes  in 
the oxygen  minimum  zones.   
It will lead to the shift of the distribution  of freshwater  fishes like an intensifying  the existing  
problems  of water  quality,  it can cause  the pronounced  stratification  in the water  column  and 
leading  to more  intense  consequences  in the freshwater  systems . It can weaken  the ocean  
carbon  sink capacity,  what  do I mean  by the weakened  ocean  carbon  sink capacity ? That 
though  we talk about  the if you plant  more , like do the plantation  and all just like in every  
fifth June we organize  this World  Environmental  Day and, on that day, only,  we just go on 
plant  a lot of terrest rial plants  and all.  
But do not forget  this fact, that terrestrial  plant is okay,  you just you should  definitely  do that, 
because  that is in your hand , but you do not have  to it is better  to remember  that most  of the 
carbon  dioxide  that is getting  consume d from  the world  is done  by the oceans.  And the 
percentage  is very high and oceanic  these  plants  are one of the major  reasons  of carbon  sink 
for the world  like you know they know  this.  
They  can consume  the maximum  amount  of carbon  dioxide  present  in the atmosphere  and it 
can make  it to it can somehow  you kn ow close  it the closest  that is why we call it carbon  
sink. Means  they go and they collect  there  they convert  it into some  other  molecular  form  and 
because  of that, we can reduce  the overall  carbon  dioxide  concentration  in the atmosphere .  
This carbon  sink capability  of the ocean  gets drastically  hampered  because  of these changes  
in the temperature  and all. It may accelerate  the virulence  lifecycle  longevity  replication  rate 
and also transmission  of pathogens  among  the several  finfish  and shelfish  species.   Water  quality  is definitely  can get deteriorated  because  of less DO, definitely  the other  type 
of anaerobes  and anoxic  micro  system  can grow  and they can this type of microorganism  can 
easily  replace  the beneficial  ones. And also, it can weaken  the cold-water  species  eco immune  
systems  and all.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:54 ) 
 
If you see this, this particular  figure  these  are the coastal  sites. It shows  see the red dots is 
actually  showing  the reduction  in the oxygen  level  to less than two milligram  per liter, which  
is like around two ppm less than two ppm right? .  
It is becau se of the anthropogenic  nutrient  and this anthropogenic  activity  because  of this 
anthropogenic  activity.  Anthropogenic  means  like human  activity,  because  of this, the 
reduction  of oxygen  level  happens  in these red dots and these  blue dots if you see they are the 
oxygen  minimum  zones  had 300 meter  of the depth.  Within  300 meter  of the depth  there  is 
like oxygen  minimum  zone , which  is like hypoxic  area, this see it is the oxygen  concentration  
is very low see 0.07 to this, if you see this hypoxic  area is the hypoxic  areas  are red dots and 
these  blue dots that deep  blue is representing  0.07 milligram  per liter of oxygen  only.  
If you go light blue is actually  showing  it is almost  okay  up to 1.9 milligram  per liter, but 
still, it is really  less it is really , really  less we have  to really  think  about  it. Because  in those  
regions  the sea a different  aquatic  species  will find it is hard to survive  in these  regions,  these  
hypoxi c areas  obviously,  these  red ones and these blue ones also.  
So, in this play,  because  of these  changes  in the temperature,  this changes  in the oxygen  level  
is happening  in these  regions  and which  will which  is actually  drastically  affecting  the overall  capture  fisheries  and all. And that is why people  are more  prone  to go for this aquaculture  and 
all. Which  is one way good  you should  go for aquaculture  practices  and scientific  way if you 
do it can be done  in sustainable  way.   
But in Capture  fisheries  defin itely you should  it is no way it can be better no way it is better  
or it has positive  impact  on environment  okay . Capture  fisheries  is simply  to my experience,  
if you ask me my expert  opinion,  you should  not go for capture  fisheries  is just no, let them  
thrive  their own ecosystem  do not go and disturb  it. So, anyway,  so, that is how this 
temperature  is affecting . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:11 ) 
 
So, every  side has some  other  part every  coin has this other  part is the same  way other  side. 
So, like the positive  impact  the temperature  difference,  the rising temperature  can also be 
beneficial  in some  sense,  what  are the ways  that I can say it is beneficial ? Some  warmer  
water  species  like giant  water  prawn,  mussels,  tilapia , oysters,  they started  growing  they can 
be grown  in the temperate  regions  nowadays .  
Because  temperate  regions,  they were  not supposed  to be like this kind of species  were  
previously  we were  not be able to culture  them  in these  temperate  regions , but now,  because  
of the warmer  climate,  people  start doing  it because  for them  also, there  is like ample  
opportunity  now to grow  this different  aquatic  species.   
They  are this warmer  periods  it favored  the expansion  of aquaculture  production  in the colder  
regions  like in the Arctic  and temperate  and this warmer  periodic  may present  the opportunity  to rear new aquatic  species  and also promote  the genetic  improvement  in the aquatic  
organism  in general.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  23:16 ) 
 
Second  thing  is ocean ic acidification,  what  is the impact  of oceanic  acidification  on 
aquaculture?  What  is the negative  impact to start with? It increases  the because  of the 
anthropo genic  oxygen  carbon  dioxide  which  normally  we released  to the atmosphere .  
It increases  the oceanic  absorption  level  and which  lead to the acidification  of wate r and once  
this acidification  happen s it reduces  the availability  of carbonate  for different  shell forming  
aquatic  species  live shrimp,  mussels,  oysters , corals  et cetera . Why ? Because  I will give you 
one very nice graphical  representation  in the next slide where  you can get a more  in in details 
idea about  why it is happening  okay .  
What  is the other  impa ct like rising  the acidity  level  in sea water  could  considerably  affect  the 
physiology  and the metabolism  of the aquatic  organisms  by disrupting  their intercell ular 
transport  mechanism,  it can increase  the production  costs  definitely  it can reduce  the species 
growth  performance  or survival  and how it happens ? (Refer  Slide  Time:  24:22 ) 
 
If you see in general  for the green  one that is like in one say like shellfi sh one is there . So, 
suppose,  what happened  with time the carbon  dioxide  because  of the anthropo genic  activity  
the carbon  dioxide  level  is rising . Ocean  is started  trying  to sink as much  as try to absorb  as 
much  as carbon  dioxide  as possible.  Because  of this overconsumption,  this carbon  dioxide  
along  with the presence  of carbonate  ion it produces  the bicarbonate  ions and all.  
Because  of this bicarbonate  ions presence  of this bicarbonate  ions and because  of this 
consumption  of the carbonate  ions, it impedes  the calcification  because  of the less amount  of 
calcification  the all the shell fishes,  they cannot form  their outer  layer  or exoskeleton . Their  
exoskeleton  is mainly  made  of this the process  of exoskeleton , the process  of making  this 
exoskeleton  of this aquatic  species  are called  this calcification  that is drastically  hampered  
because  of the presenc e of high amount  of carbon  dioxide,  which  actually  cause  the 
acidification  to take place  okay .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  25:35 ) 
 
And what  will happen  if the acidificatio n will take place ? If you see this picture  in late 1800  
in the left side picture  it shows  what  was there  in the late 1800 . At that time the Seawater  pH 
was around  8 okay . But now in 2100  it is expected  to be as low as 7 point  at that time it was 
like around  8.1, 8.2 by the end of this century,  it will be around  7.8, 7.75 something  like that.  
Though  the number  does not look so lucrative  like right?  it is like a just a small  change  in pH 
No, you do not know  how much  it can affect ? It can just simply  eradicate  simply  completely  
replen ish all type of healthy  you know , this marine  calcifiers.  Like especially  corals,  mollusk  
and all these  things,  they only very smaller  marine  calcifier  can only be sustained .  
So, because  of that if you see the in the left side this carbon  dioxide  when it comes  in contact  
with the sea it uses it produces  this carbonic  oxide  carbonic  acid free hydrogen  ions and on. 
And also, when  it comes  on react  with carbon  ions it forms  the bicarbonate  but the production  
was not as high as nowadays  it is there . If you see the you know width  of the each and every  
arrow  you can easily  understand  the amount  of it like shows kind of intensity  of that 
particular  reaction  that is happening .  
Carbon  dioxide  level  is rising  it is coming  in contact  with the in the atmosphere  see much 
higher  rate and the whole  and the discussion  that we had like it will reduce  the overall  
product ion of the overall  classification  process  and it can drastically  affect  our sea water  
atmosphere  I mean  like the seawater  ecosystem  and all.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 27:28 ) 
 
How  to minimize  this? You might  be you might  be very interested  it is very interestin g topic  
I really  want  you guys  to be very, put your concentration  on it like this is a very important  
fact that you need  to know . How  we can reduce  or like , how we can improve  the ocean  
alkalinity ? We call it enhanced  ocean  alkalinity  or enhanced  ocean  alkalinity  and all this, this 
is a very standard  process  that you can find nowadays  people  are working  on it okay . And if 
you start to start with, we produce  limestone , we can get the lime or limestone . So, different  
kinds  of this produce  normally  what  people  are doing,  they are utilizing  this lime or limestone  
and all.  
These  lime and all they simply  dump  it in the ocean  region  and all, what  will happen ? They  
react with this bicarbonate  and all. And they because  of this they once  they react  with this 
carbonate  and bicarbo nate and because  of that they produce  the final product  like which  is 
mainly  the magnesium  and the calcium  compounds  which  can be drastic  which  can this 
product  this final product  is more  stable  in nature  and they will go and settle  down  in the 
bottom . Because of that the ocean  alkalinity  can be increased , ocean  acidification  problem  
can be tackled . So, this is one way of doing  that okay .  
We norm ally do normally  your motto  is to provide  the alkaline  solution  into the seawater,  
which  will increase  which  will increase  the first of all carbon  dioxide  uptake  rate and also it 
reduces  the acidity . Because  the ones it will reduce  the acid one the alkalin e level  will 
increase  it will have  much  higher  capacity  to consume  more  and more  carbon  dioxide .  So, your target  is to increase  the alkalinity  as much  as you can in the oceanic  region.  For the 
ocean  to consume  more  and more  carbon  dioxide , the more  the carbon dioxide  it will 
consume  it pH will go down . And the more  you keep  on adding  the alkaline  solutions  it will 
you can increase  the pH much  higher  rate and that will. So, this way you can increase  the 
overall  carbon  dioxide  capture  rate from  this oceanic  bodies  and overall  ocean alkalini zation  
can be happened .  
This is a very futuristic  method  and people  are doing  it nowadays  in a very broad  scale  and it 
is expected  that in future  also that is one of the major  way of tackling  this you know  ocean  
alkalinity  problem  and ocean  acidity  problem  and all. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  30:10 ) 
 
There  are some  positive  effects  as well I as I told you like because  of this ocean  acidity  and 
all people  started  following  the aquaculture  in the hatcheries  production  in the hatchery  or in 
the farm  only. Because  of that they started  all the hatchery  and all  they are getting  much  
higher  economic  benefit  out of it. The increasing  dependence  on the hatcheries  may provide  
more  employment  opportunity  the local  community . And also, the more  intensification,  
identification  and application  of more  marine  species  are possible  for aquaculture  purposes  
by the experts  all over the world  okay .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  31:06 ) 
 
Last one, one that we will be discussing  today  about  the impact  of a disease  and harmful  algal  
blooms  in aquacultu re in general,  what  do I mean  by this harmful  algal  bloom  and all ? It is 
actually  one of the major  reaso ns of this is different  kinds  of cyanobacteria ’s actually  okay . 
The cyanobacteria  are the reason  why this product ion of this different  algal  bloom  this they 
and this cyanobacteria , they actually  produce  some  kind of toxins,  these  toxins  are very much  
harmful  for the aquaculture  produce  and al l okay .  
So anyway , this in general,  what  are the negative  effects  of this disease  and harmful  algal  
blooms ? It reduces  the species  growth  and it can reduce  the survival  rate of the species,  actual  
aquatic  species  that you are targeting,  it increases  the production  cost because  of the disease  
outbreak,  deterioration  of the water  quality,  definitely  the eutrophication  and all.  
Thermal  stress  conditio n also have  made  culture  species  more  susceptible  to the disease  and 
may cause  in the establishm ent of the exotic  diseases  and all . It increases  the occurrence  of 
infections  due during  the aquaculture  and which  will lead to the reduced  profit  and also 
overall  affecting  the socio  economical  sustainability  of the of your farm.  Also,  algal  blooms  
because  of these flagellates  and the dinoflagellates  are potentially  toxic  for finfish  and 
shellfish and their incidences  may increase  due to the climate  changes  and all .  (Refer  Slide Time:  32:37 ) 
 
In general,  this Planktothrix  species  are the one of the dominant  cyanobacter ia and this is one 
type of auto tropic  bacteria,  which  are causing  this major algal  bloom  they are toxic  that they 
are producing  is very harmful.  Other  cyanobac teria like Micro cystis  or the Anabaena  species  
are actually  responsible  for algal,  this disease -causing  algal  bloom  as well.   
One of the major  ways  of replenishing  this problem  is like, like kind of broadcasting  by 
providing  sodium  carbonate  peroxyhydrate,  which  actually  releases  the hydrogen  peroxide  
H2O2.  And when  it mixes  with the water  and this H2O2, it can kill the cyanobacteria  and the 
same  time it can break  out break down  the toxin  that may be released,  because  of these  
organisms  because  of this species.  
However,  though,  you can utilize  this. Suppose  your target  is to kill the cyanobacteria  and the 
toxins  that they are releasing  by introducing  this particular  chemi cal, because  this chemical  
can produce  H2O2  hydrogen  peroxide,  which  has very high it is a very dangerous  oxygen 
reactive  species . What  will happen ? It will not only kill the cyanobacteri a, but also it will 
cause  some  irritation  in your aquatic  species  as well. So, you have  to think  about  it either  you 
have  to take care of your aquatic  species  and treat your pond  or lake first.  
And then you put in like, put back  all your aquatic  species  that is also one way of doing  it or 
other  way,  you have  to, somehow  do it in a very small  amount,  so that it will not have  a 
drastic  effect  on your aquatic  speci es. (Refer  Slide  Time:  34:08 ) 
 
What  are the positive  impact ? Likely , the extinction  of this cold-water  species  diseases  like 
vibriosis  and winter  ulcer  which  affec ts the Atlantic  salmon  due to the emergence  of 
unfavorable  conditions , thus, favoring  their production  at the end. Because  the vibriosis  or 
winter  ulcers  are like some  of the disease , disease causing  microorganisms  which  are like the 
microorganisms  which  are responsible  for these  diseases  can also get killed  because  of the 
toxin  that is released  by cyanobacteria  and all .  
So, in one way it is helpful  for the Atlantic  salmon  and all . It may facilitate  the development  
of species  with better  resistance  to the disease.  And also, we can potentially  identify  and 
development  of new species  as possible  for, it is like survival  of the fittest . You have  to find 
out the species  which  can survive  the best in this harm ful in this drastic  environment  situation  
and you can just throw  it there  and try to let it survive  there.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  35:22 )  
 
 
So, in conclusion,  we know  that climate  change  it has a major  risk on the global  food 
production  and it can have  a very significant  threat  on the quantity  and the quality  of your 
production.  It has several  direct  and indirect  effects.  The major  efforts  we already  discussed  
rising temperature,  ocean  acidification,  diseases  and harmful  algal  blooms.  In the next 
coming  lecture, I will be discussing  about  the changes  in precip itation  and rainfall  pattern,  
global  sea level  rise, changes  in sea surface  salinity,  uncertainty  in extern al input  supplies  and 
the severe  climatic  events  will be discussed  in the coming  lecture.   
(Refe r Slide  Time:  36:05 ) 
 Overall  takeaway,  that climate  change  refers  to the variation  of the statistical  distribution  of 
weather  over an extended  period,  it can be decades  to like millions  of years,  rising  
temperature  can affect  the mortality  of the cold-water species , it can decrease  the DO content , 
DO level , it can weaken  the ocean  carbon  sink capacity  and will deteriorate  the water  quality . 
It can also potential ly the ocean  acidification  can potentially  impact  this shell  forming  aquatic  
species  but it can be somehow  you can rectify  it by different  enhanced  oceanic  alkalinity  
process  by applying  lime and all . The different  diseases  and algal  bloom  can result  in very 
poor species  growth  and reduce  the survival  and increase  the production  cost. But that can 
also be tackled  by application  of different  chemicals  that also is discussed  in this lecture  
material.   
I hope  you got to know  some  very interesting  fact about  the applic ation  the presence  of 
climate  change  and how it can affect  the aquaculture  in general . I hope  you will be more  
benefit  and be more  benefited  in the coming  lecture  where  you will be getting  some  more  
detailed  idea about  what  are the different  other  factors,  which  like or the effects  because  of 
the climate  change  on the aqua culture.  And I hope  it will give you one very broad  idea and it 
will definitely  increase  your knowledge  on this particular  matter  and on this particular  topic.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  37:40 ) 
 
These  are the references  that you can follow.  And I hope  you get to know  some  important  and 
interesting  facts  in this lecture  material.  And we will discuss  more  about  it in coming  lecture.  
Till then, thank  you so much . 