Advance Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture -53 
Fish by -products  
Hello everyone, welcome to the third lecture of module 11 aquaculture industries. My name 
is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick , I am  from the Agriculture and Food engineeri ng 
department of IIT Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:39)  
 
The concepts that I will  be covering in this particular lecture the waste that is generated from 
the fish processing industries, the fish byproducts what are the important byproducts that we 
can use of it like as I discussed in the last lecture also to remember that there is noth ing called 
waste is just that it is in a misplaced resource.  
So, if we can use the waste , if we can use those misplaced resource for the purpose for which 
we can be utilize d, then it can be of a very good use for human human utilization  human 
purpose or l ike for our utilisation or even for you can be it can be give it back to the 
environment for the replenishm ent of the environment as well. So, what are the different fish 
byproducts that is there and how we can use it.  
In this particular lecture material, we will  be covering the protein fish protein concentrate, 
fish meal and fish oil  of which  you already have some basic idea . Chitin and chitosan , 
fermented fishery products and the fish glue,  there will be some more that is left about the about when we disc uss about the important byproducts that I will  be covering in the coming 
lecture video . 
(Refer Slide Time:  01:56)  
 
The waste from fish processing . So, as I already discussed, like the fishery product that is 
prepared from a wide variety of fishes that is or the species that is found in aquatic 
environment, usually the most important like the most desirable part or the part which is like 
the removal port ion from the carcass that is used for human food for human consumption. 
However, this process leaves a large percentage of tissues which is of high in protein and 
nutritio nally desirable to go in waste.  
This is like a waste of energy that we invest in the aquatic food production and all , so why 
not to use that waste also , why not to use that waste so called waste and utilize  it for different 
other purposes and we can  get some additional economic recovery and also, we can sustain 
we can be more sustainable k ind of you can say it is a more sustainable aquaculture 
production.  So, this recovery of this waste products and they are further processing into 
byproducts or that is  why it is very important. And nowadays people are really worried there 
are experts in aq uaculture enthusiasts, aquaculture researchers all over the world, they are 
working on it.  (Refer Slide Time:  03:19) 
 
Fish byproducts, the products which is prepared from the left-out portion of the fish process 
or the fish processing operations or as well as the raw material itself that has not mean for the 
human consumption are called the fish byproduct. The principle fish products are those which 
are prepared for human consumptions everything else can be classified as fish byproducts. It 
is very important both economic and the neutrality point of view and converting this 
unwanted fish and the fish wasted to some byproducts and this nutrient by which we can 
utilize  meaningfully the nu trient and the economic return out of it.  
So, by this way, we can help in reducing the waste product which is generated from which 
can cause nuisance to the environment because you can just throw this waste into the 
environment and it will pollute the sur rounding vicinity rather than so that when you can 
utilize  it for the byproduct recovery you can reduce the environmental impact as well , is not 
it? There are various types of byproducts made from fishe ry and the aquatic product wastage  
and these byproduct s are the one that we will  be discussing in details.  (Refer Slide Time:  04:33)  
 
The most mostly the fish parts which remained after the removal of the fillet portion  and 
other parts of the fish consumption are the byproducts. What are the major processing line 
components in these byproducts ? First is the head , like snouts , brains or the gills , part of the 
head? Part of the visceral part like Gonads,  milt and roe  or the egg, liver, stomach and 
stomach and intestines .  
Other than that, the bone frames , the skins , the tails , fines,  scales mince,  blood , etc. etc. All 
these things can reutilized  for different other purposes that is what that is what the  like 
beautiness of  this kind of lecture matter and all that . We got to know some very important 
facts which really goes unknown to us and we do not  utilize  them at all and at the end, if w e 
gone through this information, s o if we have this information or knowledge with us we  can 
easily identify those waste  product and we can completely reconvert it for an important 
byproduct recovery which will give you environmental sustainability and also a high 
economic return.  
What are the byproducts fish byproducts that can be vital in t erms of uses ? The human 
supplements, biochemicals , proteins and oils, human food or ingredients can be used for 
industrial ingredients, it can be used for fish, pet food ingredients, it can be used for 
aquaculture  ingredients, or pig or chicken feed ingred ients, fertilizers , fuels , etc. etc. A lot of 
applications that it has, like I will  discuss within in this lecture material and then in the later 
slides a nd also in the coming lecture l ike what all are the uses of this fish bypro ducts.  (Refer Slide Time:  06:33)  
 
 
See, these are the different parts the heads, viscera , these frames , this roe or the egg part , the 
skin part, which we normally what we do we after we felting is done after we use the actual 
meat portion and we just throw it away , it constitutes  a huge amount of the actual  the work or 
the energy that we use for producing this aquatic animal, is not  it? 
That is  why we need to find out the way by which you can utilize  this product . So, what are 
the important fish byproducts that we will  be discussing in this lecture in the coming lecture 
video ? Fish protein concentrate,  fish meal and fish oil , chitin and chitosan , fermented fishery 
products, fish  glue, fish gelatin, roe or the caviar , fish maws  and isinglass,  pearl and essence.  (Refer S lide Time:  07:28)  
 
First is the fish protei n concentrate.  Fish Protein Concentrat e in short,  we call them FPC is a 
stable product or prepared from the whole fish or other aquatic animals or the parts thereof 
for the human consumption , how? Protein Concentration is increased by removal of the water 
and in certain cases of bone , oil, and other important other material from the fish body. What 
are the methods ? There are different methods physical , chemical , enzymatic , and the 
microbial method by which you can readily utilize  this fish protein concentrate . 
It is classified into 3 major categories , A grade  FPC means it should have at least 76.5  
percent  as a protein or above , B grade  FPC which should h ave at least 65 like at least 65 to 
more than 65 and in between 67.5  percent  as a protein , as C grade which is having at least 60  
percent  of protein. So, these three are the protein cons tituent  that it should be had when we 
can utilize  it for  like for as a stable product for different different produc tion dif ferent tools 
different reasons.  (Refer Slide Time:  08:45)  
 
Second is the fish meal  and fish oil. F ish meal it is a rich source of animal protein , it can be 
used for again the bigger fish production like all the other fish production , some carnivorous 
fish production specifically or you can use it utilize  it for as a fish meal for different 
omnivorous fishes and all you can use it for the your cattle feed , your livestock , and like it 
can be utilize d for different purposes.  
It normally contains it is a rich source of animals protein plus that different  kind of trace 
elements and also some unidentified growth factors and which and also in balance of the 
ammonia acid content and all , the essential amino acids contain all . You kn ow there is there 
are 10 essential amino acids which are very much important  for fish to have in their feed, is 
not it? 
Because of its highly nutrient supplementing nature fish meal is indispensably used a s a 
major feed stuff ingredient.  It can be produced by two methods, dry reduction and wet 
reduction method. It can be also classified in  2 grade,  grade A and grade B . Then depending 
upon your the economic return that you are  expecting the growth or the  growth in a high 
amount of growth tha t you are expecting from your farm, s o based on that from your farm 
animal based on that, you produce a product or you supply it with a grade A fish meal or the 
grade B fish meal.  
Grade A fish meal,  it should have at least 60  percent  of crude protein , less than 10  percent  of 
fat content , around 10  percent  of moisture and the acid insoluble ash walk around not more 
than 3  percent . Whereas , in case of Grade B the main difference is the crude protein it is much lesser around 50  percent  of its should be th e crude protein level  for this great B type of 
fish meal . 
(Refer Slide Time:  10:39)  
 
If you just as this is just one example of how it looks like  if you go do the mass balance of 
this fish meal production.  Suppose you have a raw fish like of 1000 kg see, the different 
texture means that different states of matter like solute , contain water or oil . I mean like here 
this water and all is the same state of matter , but I am just saying like one is water, the water 
line one is oil , and another is solid that is it showcase the amount of or you can see the 
amount of water presented the raw fish  is very high , and almost the same amount of solid and 
oil is present , oil is it a li ttle bit higher to fat content.  
So, now when you cook it , after the cooking is done, the n if you press it will you can have in 
almost 600 kg of  like put which you can put it in a decanter , another around 320 kg of the rest 
of the material  that you can go through in the further  procedure . In case of  decanter , after the 
decanting is done almost you see 650 kg of the material that you can get out which you can 
put it in the centrifuge , you can easily take out the oil part almost 108 kg and 542 kg of rest of 
the portion . If you put it in the evaporator all the wa tery portion will evaporate and that you 
can condensed and you can collect it separately , which is say like around 450 kg.  
So, now 92 Kg is separated out and it is connected to the other side of the portion, like  you 
see 320 kg plus 30 kg , which is coming from the decanter all total 350 kg plus 92 kg which is 
coming from the evaporator all total 442 kg , which is like in us kind of slurry form. So, now, 
then when you do it in the dryer when you put it in the dryer, what will happen you can easily get out of the watery portion and you will get the final meal which is around 212 kg. So, you 
can easily identify it after the press hacking procedure is done.  
So, you can easily identify from 100 kg of raw fish you will get only 212 kg of fish  meal . So, 
it always l ike that it is a very small portion of the fish mea l that you can utilize  it for further 
purpose , which is like if something was on normally it ranges  from normally it ranges from 
15 percent  to 30  percent  of the raw fish constitute raw fish the weight. So, in general that can 
be utilize d as fish meal for the procedures . 
(Refer Slide Time:  13:10)  
 
 
Processing of the fish oil . You see the fish oil that is that you can we can get out and we can 
easily find out without using the centrifuge centrifugation process you see almost 108 kg  is 
separable  and also it is still stays there as in a very small portion in your in the fishmeal also . Anyway,  the fish oil that you can get this fresh fish oil that you can separate  it out almost 108 
kg from 1000, just to giv e you one example.  
So, in this fish oil can we use for different purposes . How will the fishery normally be treated 
with the aquatic alkalis solutions? So, to remove the any free fatty acids in the form of soap 
and also to coagulate  any of the unsaturated mucilage and all, t his is the process of very 
standard process of making soap .  
You know  the how earlier days people use the fish meal or  the different animal oil , I mean 
like the fish oil or the animal oil , and we add it added with the aqueous alkali solution to 
produce the soap or the detergent material and especially the soap material soapy material 
and on how it is made earlier days. So, even now also this the same procedure is more like 
more sophisticate d method has been used, but almost the procedure s or chemi cal formula is 
almost the same.  
Then the bleaching is done. The colo ring matter and the natural pigments are removed by 
treating the oil with net activated clay or the natural clay in hot condition.  After the refining 
and the bleaching procedure is done then we go for hydrogenation . The unsaturated fatty 
acids are hydrogenated by heating up to 170 to 2400 degrees Celsius in the presence of nickel 
catalyst and hydrogen gas .  
As the final step which is  called deodorizing  as a final step of hardening where the small 
quantity of volatile compounds are removed by steam distillation and under in under a 
vacuum condition , using rotor waiters and different other procedures  and all . So, by this way 
at the end you will get a very thick solid , like thick amount of fish oil which you can utilize  it 
for different purposes.  (Refer Slide Time:  15:29)  
 
Second, like another important byproduct fish byproduct is chitin and chitosan.  Chitin  and 
chitosan  like are produce  from the exoskeleton of the shellfish es such as prawns , crabs, 
lobsters, etc . How we are collected  there is a we can we can collect it we can simply we can 
produce it we can see we can they normally naturally they get rid of these p rocesses they 
because of the mo lting process they are anyway they  get rid of their exoskeletons.   
This exoskeleton  this we can we can chitin  and we can use it for this production of different 
byproducts . How chitin  is used?  They are the what is this chitin?  It is naturally occurring 
polymer of N-acetyl D-glucosamine,  where the constituents mono -saccharides units in this 
are linked together with the one 1-4 glycosidic bonds . 
Same way is Chitosan actually, it is a N-deacetylated  form of chitin or produced by 
substituting the acetamide  group of chitin with the different amino groups , majorly the 
quaternary amin o groups or the tertiary amin o groups.  That is  how the chitin and like 
chitosan are formed. A nd then this can be utilize  it for further purpose like both marine and 
the freshwater invertebrates are good sources of this chitin and the  chitosan .  
So, this commonly used product or the production procedure mainly consist of two steps, 
demineralization  and second deproteini sation , out of these two procedures we c an get this 
chitin  and the chitosan  from the fish shell , I mean  like the exoskeleton of this different kind 
of shell fishes.  (Refer Slide Time:  17:13)  
 
How it is done, you see the prawn shells are collected, washing, grinding and sieving  and you 
will get this fine powder of less than five 500 microns in size. You go for this acid treatment 
like 7  percent  HCL add to  24 hour you will get demineralization  procedures and at the end 
you will get the mineralized powder .  
Then this demineralized  procedure  powder is again go for this alkali treatment , 10 percent  
NaOH at 60 degrees Celsius for 24 hour you will get the chitin . And then if you add it with 
the sodium hydroxide nitrogen gas  the condition when you burn it at  60 degrees Celsius for 8 
hour you will get the chitosan or  the chitosan  it depends like place to place it the 
pronunciation vary. So, you understand the procedure how we can get the chitin  or the 
chitosan  from the fish the exoskeleton of the shell fishes and all . (Refer Slide Time:  18:10)  
 
So, what are the applications of this tool ? In general,  some of the major application of chitin 
and chitosan  are like the food industry , it is used for as a source of dietary fiber  in food , 
chitin , and it is used as a thickening agent . Pulp and paper industry,  it is used as an additive 
for producing the paper with high surface strength , it is a very important additives actually it 
is very important for Pulp an d Paper industries.  
Water purification, it is used as a flocculating agent becau se this chitosan  has some ionic 
resin actually structure it is called with different ionic resins , it is because of its the surface 
charge that it presents and because of that it can be utilize d as a flocculating agent for 
clarification of industrial efflu ents and as a chelating agent f or the removal of heavy metals, 
maybe radioactive metals and polychlorinated by phenols, which is PCBs, which is very toxic 
compounds and which has to be removed from the wastewater before it discharged into the 
before it is discharged into the surface water bodies.  
Chemical industries as a wastewater decontaminant in oil refineries, it used for enzyme 
immobilization  as a well. C osmetic industry or personal care product it is used for the 
manufacture of dry shampoo, hair condi tioner, hair setting lotions and etc. Biomedical it is 
used for manufacturing of artificial struc tures of artificial biological , I mean like bio 
mimicking structures like anticoagulants, artificial kidney membranes and all. So, there are a 
lot there are different use of this chitin and chitosan  in there in general.  (Refer Slide Time:  20:08)  
 
So, next is the fermented fishery products. Fermentation is defined as the process of 
transformation of organic substance into simpler co mpounds by the action  of enzymes and 
microorganisms, s o the fermentation is done. So, in the preparation of the fermentation 
products, they the breakdown of protein is partial and which is controlled by the soiled and 
endogenous enzymes in the fish present  in the fish.  
This fermentation process could be due to the hydrolysis of endogenous enzymes or could be 
due to the exogenous enzymes of microbes present in the fish.  What are the different types of 
fermented product that is prepared ? Fermented fish , fermented past e, fermented paste  or 
fermented fish sauce, which has different industrial applications and all. 
(Refer Slide Time:  20:58)  
 Another important very like you would  be very happy to know about this important fact 
about the fish glue . Do you kn ow it is much better than the regular glue that is present in the 
ordering carpenters glue that we use, it is much better this fish glues  and all . This fish glue it 
is a kind of adhesive that you can extract from the fish skin and other body parts. It is u sed 
for the preparation of the raw material for glue making , which involved in salting of the swim 
bladder and the scale of the fish processing industry factory  before they are send to the glue 
factory . 
Procedures first is the washing , you wash the fish with the cold water at for 1 to 2 hour, if it is 
a fish water , for solid water 12 hour , then cook it for 8 hours then store it and preservatives 
like oxalic acid or the borax , which is used and stored in which is and then store it in the  glass 
bottles. What are the applications ? This fish glue is very viscous.  Because of his viscosity 
because of its high viscosity it is about 50 to 100  percent  more adhesive in nature than 
ordinary carpenters glue . As I told you like it is very famous actu ally in glue industry and 
there are people who actually work on these different kinds of glues and all . 
It is used as a ready to use adhesive in furniture making , box making , bookbinding , etc. So, 
you can use it this as a byproduct and it is very easy to actually prepare , you just need to 
know the exact method , you collect it from the  industry or the market and you can utilize  it 
for glue processing process and all, glue  processing  like preparing glue and all.  
(Refer Slide Time:  22:48)  
 
So, all these things are possible , all this use a fish protein concentrate which is very important 
as use as a super food , you can take it which is which will give you some like people with a protein deficiency they should really have it . Chitin  and chitosan is used for different 
industrial application and chemical research in the research purpose as well. Fermented fish, 
fish sauce, fish paste, so these are used for increasing the food quality or the taste or texture 
of your food and we are in f or different animal livestock application purposes as well.  
Fish oil and fish meal , fish oil is used it is very much good for it is used in different 
pharmaceutical industries and all . Fish meal is added with the fish pellets and all in the fish 
feed for higher protein availability for your rea ring product rea ring produce . Fish glue, as we 
discussed, it is very it is has very high adhesiveness and it can be utilize d for different 
utilisation you can  use it for different purposes.  
(Refer Slide Time:  23:55)  
 
There are lots of other byproducts and the fish byproducts and like are there , due to the time 
cost and I cannot cover all  of it in this lecture material, b ut in the coming lecture material  I 
will discuss about more in details about some more couple of few fish byproducts which are 
there for long and people are people can use it and industries can be set up for  they can utilize  
all the part of this fish products so that they can get maximum benefit  out of it.  
So, in general into to conclude today's this lecture. The various byproducts are prepared from 
fish, shellfish, such as like fish protein concentrate, fish oil, fish meal, chitin , chitosan,  fish 
glue and fermented products are important. These are great ways of utilising the waste 
produced during the fish processing to make nutritive products and g enerate the additional 
revenue.  (Refer Slide Time:  24:55)  
 
And as a takeaway message I would I will tell you that needs which we can get from the 
small fishes and fishes with a very low consumer demand can be utilize d for the preparation 
of the fish protein concentrate and once you convert it to the fish protein c oncentrate it can be 
sold in a much higher value , it will give you much high economic return and it will definitely 
used for nowadays people are very much concerned about their health and all this diet and 
also it is a very important dietary substances tha t you can replace to , I mean like I would not 
say replace but definitely you can use it if you have if you feel  like if you have a deficiency in 
protein or if you want to supplement it with protein for some specific purpose for your game 
or for your muscle  development and all.  
The waste like  scales bones , heads  with trash  fishes can be used to use the used for fish milk 
production. Fermented products which are delicacy in the Southeast Asian countries have 
very high nutritional value and othe r products have  controlled autolytic degradation  in the 
presence or absence of salt , this fermented products or sometimes we call them pickle 
products as well.  
Anyway, So, though that is scientifically wrong pickle is different and fermentation is 
different . These fermented products  are very much very famous in places like Indonesia, in 
places like Cambodia , in places like Japan and all. Shrimp  and other crustacean  wasted are 
can be used for the preparation of chitin and chitosan , which have got industrial as well a s 
domestic applications . So, other than that we already we also discussed about the fish glue, which you really hope 
you will be really surprised and we will  be very happy to know more details about all these 
byproducts and how you can use those things for  developing your own and entrepreneurship 
if you want in future.  
How we can think about , like how we can utilize  this technology this wonders  for your 
developing your own entrepreneurship in future for or in this sector because there are a lot of 
opportunities that lie in the sector but in India there it is actually it is a very unorganized  
sector and people are not putting much of an effort an d there is there will be a high bloom in 
the coming decade in this particular sector and I hope you will be the person who joined this 
race fast enough to get the maximum gain.  
(Refer Slide Time:  27:36)  
 
 So, that is it for the day these are the conclusion. So, I mean, these are the references that you 
can go ahead for more details. I hope you get to know some important information from this 
lecture and I hope it will definitely help you to gain gather more kn owledge in future and if 
you can, if you want to again, I will  be very happy to help you . Thank you so much. See you 
in the next lecture.  