Advance Aquaculture Technology
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Lecture 58
Mitigation and Adaptive Strategies 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:31)
Hello, everyone. Welcome to the third lecture material of the module 12 environmental 
considerations of aquaculture. My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick, I am from 
agriculture and food engineering department of IIT, Kharagpur. (Refer Slide Time: 00:37)
In this lecture material we will be discussing about mainly the different mitigation techniques 
and different adaptation strategies that we can follow. The same material we will be discussing 
for the next two lecture also, where we will be elaborately discussing about different 
climatological conditions which are affecting the aquaculture process aquaculture system.
And how this system how this sector is actually is adapting, what are the way by which it can 
adapt to these changes in the climate, climatic condition and also what are the different 
mitigating techniques that we can follow and that will be discussed in details in the next two 
lectures as well. 
So, the concepts that I will be covering in this particular lecture are the impact of climate change 
on aquatic animal health, introduction to mitigation and adaptation strategies mitigation of 
climate change impacts on the aquaculture. (Refer Slide Time: 01:35)
So, to start with, you know this is not something very new to you, I can I am hundred percent 
sure, because, that how the climate change like, remember, we discussed in the last two lecture 
also, how different climatological factors are actually affecting the aquaculture sector like how 
they can affect the health how they can affect the habitat and how they can affect the overall 
behavior analysis, behavioral changes, it was already discussed in last two lecture material and 
here also, we will be discussing in details. 
And the more in depth discussion on the aquatic animal health will also be done in this lecture. 
So, mainly, we will be discussing about the how these different the changes in this climatic 
condition how it can help to spread different kinds of pathogens for this aquatic microorganisms. 
They not only enhance the pathogenic prevalence in that, any sector like whether it be farm 
whether it be say like aquaculture in a surface water bodies.
So, how it is affecting this aquatic bodies, aquatic animals, like prevailing this pathogens, they 
are virulence and the host susceptibility and the disease transmission, these are the factors that 
are severely affected by the climate change. Especially this when the climatic condition is not up 
to the mark or not up to the same standard that those aquatic animal are actually well habituated 
with. So, what will happen like especially, when it is in a very static sector that you are in a static 
medium by at which you are growing your aquatic animals, they will be in maximum danger, 
they will be in most vulnerable situations, because they cannot escape that situation, they cannot 
escape that particular land or particular pond or farm or something. So, for them this climatic 
change, these changes in the climate are actually having very drastic effect in their well being. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:56)
So, we will have to think about different strategies and different mitigation techniques or 
adaptive strategies for to get rid of this. To start with we will first discuss about the different 
examples of different microbiological infections like it can be parasitic, it can be viral, it can be 
bacteriological. I will be discussing in coming slides. 
So, in this particular slides, I have discussed about I have given some examples of parasitic 
infections, which are affecting the aquatic animals because of the climatic change climate change 
dimensions. Do you have any idea about what is El Nino or La Nina? These are two actually two 
different climatic conditions. Two different kinds of event it is named as an El Nino and La 
Nina. 
If you do not know you can Google it and it is this this El Nino is something which is drastically 
changing the whole weather pattern or the whole climatic condition of the earth right now. Just to start with just to give you one example like just to give you some brief about what is El Nino, 
El Nino it means little boy it is a Spanish word. 
So, what does it mean what happen this Pacific region if you see this figure in the Pacific region 
in the western side of the USA, there normally what happened in a specific time of the year the 
hot air water it will move from one place to another the hot water it tends to move towards the 
more western side and towards the east side of the this Asia. So, it moves towards that and the 
cold water what is actually in general they come in place of this cold in this hot water bodies in 
the western side of the USA that is a general phenomenon. 
Because of the climatic because of the change because of the global warming and change in 
different reason, this is not happening this effect is how to say it is changed it is not the same 
way it used to be even like 50 years back also. 
The hot water that it is supposed to go towards more towards the western side it is not happening 
what happened instead the hot water that that hot water it is keep on accumulating in that specific 
zone only which can cause a very huge amount of cyclonic and typhoon events and very high 
amount of precipitation in the southern part of the America whereas the Pacific part of the 
America like Pacific West part of America, they will be warm and dry and they will there is 
facing severe drought situations. This is because of the El Nino this is related to this event called 
El Nino. 
The same way there is another term called a La Nina, La Nina is like it is a Spanish word it is 
also it means the little girl to the best of my knowledge little boy and little girl. So, this La Nina 
event when it happens why I am giving you this extra information, it will help you understand 
the factor much nicer way that what is actually happening in our earth and how this changes in 
the oceanic behavior is actually affecting the landmass as well. 
Though we can think like why do we have to worry about because whatever is happening in the 
ocean, it keeps it will be in the ocean only no it will have a very drastic effect on the 
environmental situation and the I mean like the climatic situation of your region as well. So, this 
is just one example.In case of La Nina what happen, in that case hot water it will go towards the west, but the 
amount will of the hot water is much higher, which is moving towards the west and which can 
cause just the opposite effect in US condition if I say only about the condition which will prevail 
in the US. 
In case of La Nina in a southern part of the US will be in drought condition and the west Pacific 
west part will be affected with the huge amount of rainfall, this is a very sudden changes in the 
climate which are not there even few years back few decades back also and this events this 
anomalies climatic this climate anomalies are keep on increasing year by year by another. 
So, because of that, it has a drastic impact on the aquaculture as well, in order to start with before 
just to give you some example about how these climates, climatic conditions are affecting 
aquaculture, we will be discussing for the next two three slides that how it can affect. 
Like I am giving one example to start with, like the oyster disease parasitic infection in case of 
oyster diseases, this Bonamiosis or Marteiliosis is or say like Parkinsiosis these are the different 
diseases or environmental risk factors that the oysters are actually facing, because of the event 
like El Nino, because what happened this El Nino which is occurred in the, it is actually very 
much correlated with this Mexican oyster pathogen outbreak and its range extend up to the 
western pathogens in the New England region as well. 
So, that is why this specific event El Nino is not only affecting the landmass, but also landmass 
and the land like a species, but it is also affecting the aquatic species present there, because of the 
changes in the temperature changes in the this overall climatic behavior. (Refer Slide Time: 09:42)
The same way there are earlier example was about the parasitic infection like different kind of 
parasitic infection, we can discuss about the different bacterial load, in case of like, different 
types of streams, the culture streams, they are actually very much threatened with this Vibrio 
species of this bacteria and this Vibrio species they are very much, they started growing, I mean 
like they started affecting our culture farm affecting our typhoid farms in the way the streams are 
normally being cultured. 
And this is considered as the reason of changes in the climatic situations like because of the 
climatic changes, the temperature, salinity, turbidity and the presence of zooplankton, 
crustaceans and mollusks are also changed and all these factors are actually affecting and causing 
this kind of bacterial pathogenic infection or like the disease outbreak in stream species. 
Same way the viral diseases in El Nino event that happened in 1987, 88, 91, 92, 94, 95 and 97, 
98, it is very much the experts say that it is very much associated with the emergence of different 
viral diseases like TSVs, TSV white spot syndrome disease like WSSV and all (()) (11:11) and 
they are the loss are in the range of millions to several billions of USD because of this climatic 
event. 
So, you can understand like how our activities I will definitely say it is our activities, because of 
our anthropogenic activity only the chain the earth is experiencing in this improper situation and this abnormalities in the anomalous is in the climate a condition. So, this is not only this is not 
only affecting the whole like ourselves, but also is affecting land animals aquatic animal, the 
whole ecosystem.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:49)
Fungal diseases are also getting outbreak like this in this because of this events and one specific 
type of this disease called this Epizootic Ulcerative syndromes or EUS we call in short. So, it is 
actually considered to be the reason behind the ballast water movement the shipping movements 
the fish migrations and the ocean current and the rainfall. You know what is shipping movement 
you know what is the fish migration ocean current and also the rainfall maybe you do not know 
about what is ballast water, ballast water is sometimes just to give you one example suppose you 
have a oil tanker. 
So, in your oil tanker from oil tanker it is like say when it comes from the oil mine to your port. 
So, it in when it comes with the load of oils and in the port it will void itself so after then what 
will happen it is structured the ships are structured in such a way that it can carry up to that load 
of oil and that particular amount of weight, but when it will disperse when you will the 
containers and the these tankers they unload themselves like at the end they will be very light in 
a weight. So, because of that there is there will be changes in different factors the and drag forces (())(  
13:21) that is a different thing anyway the ship movement will be affected. So, because of that 
what we do we put instead of oil we simply replace it with the water we fill up the water of this 
tankers and from that region and then we go to the then that ships again going back to the oil 
mine and then they get rid of all the water and then they fill up with the oil. 
Now, the thing is what do you think these waters are pure water freshwater no, this is the water 
which they can collect it from the near coastal region only when they are collecting this water 
from the near coastal regions what will happen it is very much reach in different faunas and flora 
and faunas. 
So, once they are very much reach in this flora and faunas this which is like specific to that 
specific place, now it is moving say like hundreds of kilometers away and go to the oil mine then 
it will replace this water with the oil again and this water will come in contact with the that 
following water body right now.
And because of that what will happen those flora and fauna which is very much specific to that 
core that coastal region it will be replaced to that it will not be replaced it will come and it will 
enjoy a new environment but it will definitely not enjoy because the thing is like for them that 
environment that ecosystem is not built for them. Or suppose whatever you are carrying it from 
the coastal regions, maybe they are they are being considered as a predator for in the nearby 
water vicinity where you are discharging them. 
So, anyway in the both way it is not good, for in the both way for both of the cultures, both of the 
species that was there in like, set a site A and site B, for both of them, it is a very, very much 
change, it is like the whole ecosystem can get collapsed, because of these changes in the because 
of this different movement of the species because of this ballast water. 
So, now I think you I hope you will understand you understand, like, what is why this is 
something like not to be practiced and if you are practicing, you have to make sure that the water 
that you are carrying, it is like, free of any restricted migratory species, restricted species to be 
migrated. So, there are a lot of practices, lot of discussions, lot of expert’s opinion are there it is floating in the air, but still there are a lot of work to be done in this particular sector. Anyway, so 
this EUS, this type of fungal diseases are prevalent because of these activities. 
And it is like very, it is a one of the most serious aquatic disease which affects the finfish, and it 
has a indirect long term effect, like, it can threat the environment in the aquatic biodiversity and 
also it can decline the fish biomass and also irreversible ecological disruption can also happen. 
So, all these things are there, all these factors are there, which has to be properly taken care of 
otherwise, they will be a destruction in the whole ecosystem. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:36)
So, now we know about all this factors. Now, let us discuss about the mitigation and adaptation 
technologies, strategies that is there, majorly, the climate change related risks to aquaculture, 
food security and the water supply and the economic development will continue to increase 
unless until we really restrict our global warming limit up to 1 point 5 degrees Celsius. 
So, and because of that, both the agriculture sector like as well as the capture, as well as the 
culture fisheries, as well as the communities, those are involved, they are required to mitigate 
and adapt to the changing climate situation by developing or using the advanced technologies 
and resources. This mitigation and the adaptive adaptation, it together, it can help prepare the eco farming 
community population and the ecosystem to build resilience and effectively cope with the 
climatic situation on the climate changes in the climatic conditions. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:42)
So, to start with the mitigation to what do I mean by the mitigation to mitigation, it is like 
normally, we focus on reducing or reversing the rate of climate change, which is very hard to do, 
but it is possible, it is a collective effort of us definitely can do a major change. Mainly the 
aquaculture producers, as well as the stakeholders can play a substantial role in mitigating the 
climate change effect. 
First of all, they can minimize the emission of greenhouse gas, they can start utilizing the 
environmental friendly practices and the technologies which is available and which is like 
experts are already provided, and it is already there in the pen and paper, but you just need to 
follow it and you just need to replicate it and make it introduce it to your new to your farm 
design. 
In mitigation, it is actually a long term solution for climate change and it has to be implemented 
simultaneously with the adaptation strategies for better and more effective outcomes. So, only mitigation will not do the job, you have to adapt with the change in situation as well. So, both are 
equally important. (Refer Slide Time: 18:52)
So, what are the measures or what are the processes or like how we can, you can reduce the or 
mitigate the greenhouse gas emissions from aquaculture. To start with, suppose, in order to 
reduce the emission from reproduction of the feed materials, what you can do, you can 
compound this aquaculture feed and select the feeds with lower associated emissions, like, 
locally sourced oil seeds instead of fishmeal or fish oil, which is sourced from the capture 
fisheries which definitely cause certain it has also its carbon footprint. 
I hope you guys know what is carbon footprint? Any product that is developed we can call it a 
green product, sustainable product it is not it does not matter that at that particular moment, you 
are using some sustainable technology and you are considering you are claiming it to be organic 
or claiming it to be carbon neutral. 
No, suppose just to give you example, we say like electro most of the electric car and electric 
vehicles are very much good for the environment, it is only good at the moment when you start 
utilizing the energy source from the renewable energy like if you are harvesting the energy for 
that particularly EV car and EV cell from the renewable energy then you may call it somehow 
carbon neutral. Still the construction material is whichever is involved to harvest that renewable 
energy, it also has some carbon footprint, because in order to manufacture those, you need to 
involve some amount of energy. So, you have to go up to the source for each and every instruments or each and every chemicals 
or whatever you have used, you have to go up to the source and you have to understand that what 
is its carbon footprint. 
Then only you accumulatively come and go to and at the end, you will do this lifecycle analysis 
and at the end you will say, so, my product is carbon neutral, because whatever the key raw 
materials that I have used, they whatever the carbon footprint they are having that can be surplus 
that can be neutralized by the material that I have developed, this way we can call it carbon this 
way we can call it carbon neutral technology, so, sustainable technologies. So, but this carbon 
neutrality and carbon footprint is very important for you to understand. 
So, this is the reason why we can go it is better to replace the fish oil fish meal with the locally 
sourced oil seeds because this fish meal for to capture this fish to prepare this fish meal and fish 
oil you have to go to the open sea for capture fisheries it will cost a lot of transportation the oil 
and involve people's involvement and all these things, it has a huge carbon footprint. 
So, in order to reduce that carbon footprint or greenhouse gas emissions, what you can do you 
can start go with a locally produced material, it can reduce the emission from the feed meal 
energy just like you can improve the management efficiency of the feed meals, you can 
substitute the high emission intensity fuels with the low emission intensity alternatives, you can 
improve the food conversion ratio by optimizing the nutrition content you know how to do that 
we have already discussed you can improve the Feed Management Technology increase the 
dissolved oxygen level. 
So, to increase the feeding efficiency you can improve the fish health, the better the fish the 
health of the fish and the better it will the more amount of food it will consume and the more 
amount of biomass conversion it will do from the feed. 
So, how we can reduce how we can improve the fish health you have to improve the water 
quality management practice maintaining a proper fish stocking density it cannot be much higher 
implement efficient biosecurity measures and use the medicines properly and try to quarantine 
the fishes which are already in danger and so that it and treat it very cautiously so, that it will not go and damage your whole farm and also it will reduce your overall strategy overall, economic 
return as well. 
So, these are the practice that you should follow you should have to reduce on from nitrous oxide 
emissions like you can reduce the amount of nitrogen available in for this conversion of this 
nitrous oxide to by like just an example you can add into the fertilization guidelines by provided 
by the local authorizing body for pond aquaculture and improve the feed management that 
targets the reducing the uneaten fish food because this uneaten food is actually converted into the 
waste materials. So, if you reduce this uneaten food consumption, you can definitely increase the 
productivity and also it you can definitely work on the environmental cleanliness. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:10)
So, typically, for capture fisheries, the greenhouse gas emission is actually mainly related to the 
primary fuel uses like I mean like the fuel that they use for the transportation it can be it is 
depending upon the type of the vessel or the gear they are using and majorly it is majorly 
depends on this kind of technical aspects only. And they are actually responsible for almost 0.5% 
of the global carbon dioxide emissions. 
Can you imagine this fishing vessels, it is captured fishery still in this particular in this era also, 
we are talking about this where there are like very much advanced technologies already available just because of the lack of initiation, initiation from our side we are losing we are actually 
generating these much of greenhouse gases. 
This generation of these greenhouse gases can be further minimized by advanced fishing vessels 
that require less fuel for harvesting the traditional species by using the renewable sources of 
energy like instead of fossil fuels like solar, wind or tidal can be used. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:20)
There are other measures also that can also be done to improve the fuel efficiency in the existing 
vessels like the hull related I think you know what is hull the structure the main the bottom 
structure that is there in the ship.
Let me show you the with the figure if you see this figure of a ship, in general any ship or any 
vessel in this aquatic vessels if you see the number 4 if you see the number 4 in the bottom that is 
called the hull. 
And this number 1 this is the funnel and there is this 2 this stern in the backside of it which is 
like stern and then it has his propeller just below the stern we have this propeller, we have this 
anchors to stuck to the seafloor, we have this bow in if you see number 6 in the front there is like 
one extension that is called bow and this is the forward in the upper deck extension that is called 
forward and the deck and the accommodation the bridges. 
So, this is the how these vessels are actually vessels looks like in any ship. So, this hull this is the 
bottom this hull what happens sometimes this what are the measures that we can do we can do 
this we can retrofit installation of the Bulbous Bow.
And what is Bulbous Bow this you see the bow number 6 which is in the extension of this 
bottom this hull part of this call this is the Bow what this bow is doing in general when the 
suppose there is a ship there is like typical rerik (()) (27:00) structure it will go cutting the water 
waves.
So, what will happen because of the generation of the wave it will go up and down then it will 
lose it because of this wave because there will be an additional wave that it will generate from its 
the front part of its hull and because of that what will happen there is a chances of high drag into 
your vessel and this drag value will be very high and also because of that the motion of the ship 
will be very unstable. That is why people started introducing these bows and especially if you have this Bulbous say 
this Bulbous Bow that we call when we retrofitted in this kind of structures, what will happen 
this Bulbous Bow they because of their specific design, it will kind nullify this generation of the 
wave or it will create the wave which will just, just like the opposite to the sinusoidal curve. 
Suppose your bow is generating like say 0 degree to 90 then again 180 like this and because of 
the Bulbous Bow it will go from the other way around it will from 0 to negative side then 90 to 
180 because of this the opposite sinusoidal curve that it is generating, it will nullified the wave 
pattern around. 
So, in general it will reduce the drag and reduce the it will increase the stability of the ship 
because of the reduction in the drag and the increase in the stability of the ship it will consume 
less amount of fuel you understand why we why the ships they provide this Bulbous Bow that is 
there in front of the ships. So, this is the reason. 
Hull appendages the hull should be as smooth as aligned as possible it should not have the edges 
because if there is edges what will happen it will cause the resistance the water will stuck and it 
will restrict the how to say it is the velocity of your fishing vessel. So, it will restrict because of 
this restriction that it is if the resistance that it is getting from this extra appendages from your 
hull. So, you should avoid it, it should be as smooth as possible the bottom structure. 
Proportionate and vessel speed you have to reduce you have to do. So, all this changes in the hull 
related items it can save the fuel 5 percent to as high as 15 percent is Bulbous Bow was (()) 
(29:22). In case of hull appendages 2 percent to 5 percent if you properly maintain the speed, it 
can go 5 to even 20 to 30 percent of the fuel saving is possible. 
Engine replacement with the new definitely it will the moment it will start you have to change it 
according to your shelf life, according to the manufacturer's guide, the gearbox propeller nozzles 
trim and weight the fuel meter it all these things really does matter how you are maintaining your 
fishing vessels or how you are maintaining, just to increase the capacity of increase the fuel 
efficiency and because of that, by means of this you can save the climate change because by events of this you can save the greenhouse gas emission and obviously it is good for you for your 
business as well. 
There are other activities as well like the thrust component like the engine selection, you have to 
go for a very proper powered I mean like correct power adaptation is, selection power selection 
is very much important with very much advanced design that is available in the market. 
The engine installation properly proper intake and exhaust lines is important including the fuel 
meter gearbox the it should be largest possible propeller and with the RPM of less than 1000 and 
propeller nozzle or duct included where vessel size and speed is appropriate. 
What are the resistance component like the hull dimension increased length and what will 
happen it will give the hull to switch proper speed capacity and replacement and operation, trim 
you have to currently balance to match the hull design you have to correct the shape especially 
for bow in the bow and the stern areas to maintain the hull shape for in proper way. 
You have to include where the vessel size and the speed is appropriate this Bulbous Bow should 
be included the hull appendages should be reduced as I discussed because to smooth shape will 
give you the proper water flow proper velocity it will not provide any restriction or any 
resistance. 
You have to improve its hydraulics upgrading the pumps and control how to increase the 
recreation upgrading the compressors and pumps and the good insulation of your recreation unit 
heating and cooling and electricity lighting utilize the waste heat and the good insulation and 
good control and properly time to time switch off you have to if you have a parasitic load such as 
pumps and motors, you have to reduce by designing and engineering properly. 
So, all these factors always implement installations if you do, you can definitely improve the 
overall fuel consumptions the you can improve the overall greenhouse emissions by all the other 
means by the carbon footprint that I discussed. (Refer Slide Time: 32:18)
So, what are the currently available and what are the emerging technologies available for 
reducing the greenhouse gas emission so currently available technologies we have this diesel we 
normally it is we use it for inefficient vessels over 7 meter in length and it generates for 
generators for the electric power and recreations and the hydraulics it has a greater engine 
efficiency but it emmits huge amount of nitrogen NO x, SO x and particulate matters.
Whereas petrol or gasoline it is used for the small fishing tank mainly in outboard motors it has a 
lower engine efficiency but carbon dioxide emission is higher than diesel, but it has a very low 
NO x and low particulate matter and only a stress amount of SO x is emitted.
Liquid natural gas it is a sometimes people use it in the shipping vessels especially where the 
NO x emissions are taxed. So, carbon dioxide emission is almost 25 percent less than diesel 85 
percent less in case of inverse emissions, no SO x emissions and particulate matter. But methane 
production is there and is produced when you use the liquid nitrogen natural gas kerosene it is 
the notorious one it has it is not efficient as efficient as gasoline but very high carbon dioxide 
emission and dirty exhaust. 
Biodiesel IC engines converted to bond this biodiesel and blended with the gasoline and diesel 
sometimes it can reduce the pollutants like particulate matter, carbon monoxide hydrocarbons but can increase the NO x compared to diesel there it is possible just remind this is not biodiesel it 
is completely pure. 
Hybrid electric or the diesel electric they are similar to diesel engine diesel engine based internal 
combustion diesel based diesel fuel based internal combustion engines whereas ethanol propanol 
are also being used now it is. What are the alternatives, better alternatives go for battery electric. 
Small vessels of they can you can use the battery electric and if it is only the emission is 0 if the 
batteries are charged from renewable electricity still I would not say it is 0 it is near to 0 because 
of its carbon footprint. 
Fuel cell based it is a very advanced technology if you remember in the sixth module we have 
discussed about sixth I think or seventh or eighth model I do not know in twelth that we have 
discussed like what are the different biochemical systems how they can be used to generate 
electricity out of the waste materials. And this electricity can be transferred to your ship.
Solar energy, wind propulsion, wind and other renewable energies like the tidal energies that also 
can be used in your shipping vessels, which can be which will be considered as a very, which 
will definitely reduce the overall greenhouse emission gas emissions you will see this is a 
example of a solar powered steamers, how it looks like it definitely it is a completely solar 
powered steamers.
(Refer Slide Time: 35:32)
So, in conclusion, there are different climate change related risk are there in aquaculture and 
food security in the water supply and the overall economic development and what are the 
mitigation techniques that we can follow, we discussed in details it will be followed by coming 
lecture materials as well. 
(Refer Slide Time: 35:59)
And I hope you in the coming lecture, you will get to know more about the what are the different 
other adaptive strategies that we need to follow other than the mitigation techniques that we are 
discussing right now. 
We discussed about that these things to be go along like the mitigation technique as well as 
adaptation strategies has to go along in order to prepare your eco farming communities 
population in the ecosystem to build the resilience and effectively cope with the greenhouse the 
climate changes. (Refer Slide Time: 36:26)
These are the references that you can follow to gain more knowledge about it. I hope this lecture, 
from this lecture material you are very much enlightened with the very important factors the 
physics behind all these things and you got to know that how we can effectively eliminate how 
we can take the different mitigation technologies are already available, which can be replaced or 
the retrofitted on a existing ones so, to reduce the greenhouse emission to so to, somehow reduce 
the climate change anomalies and all these factors. 
I hope you are very much benefited with this lecture we will continue in the coming two lectures 
as well about this different climate change effects in the aquaculture and what are these 
mitigation and adaptive strategies. Thank you so much. See you in the next lecture video. 