Advanced  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Lecture  57  
Impact of Climate  Change  on Aquaculture  (Contd.)  
Hello  everyone,  welcome  to the second  lectur e of the module  12 on the environmental  
conservation  of aquaculture.  So, my name  is Professor  Gaurav  Dhar  Bhowmick . I am from  
the Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  department  of IIT Kharagpur.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:39) 
 
The concepts  that I will be covering  in this particular  lecture  material  are the negative  and the 
positive  impact  of different  climatic , the effects  of different  climate  change  conditions  like 
variation  in the rainfall  or the precipitation  pattern  on aquaculture . Sea level  rise and impacts  
of it in aquaculture  uncertainty  on of different  external  inputs  supplies,  changing  sea surface  
salinity  on aquaculture  and also severe  climatic  events  on aquaculture  and all okay . (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:10) 
 
So, in general  to start with you know,  the rainfa ll on the precipitation  pattern  is changing  like 
anything  nowadays,  the places  where  it is supposed  to be having  you know  like the flood  in 
certain  amount  certain  period  of time a certain  period  of season,  there  is like drought  on the 
other  way around  in different  places.  In India, most  of the places  are like, they can normally  
witness  6 different  seasons  precisely  even  like 10 years  back  also. 
But now,  you can hardly  see like three  you can hardly  understand  the changes  in the season  
time to time it is like it is very rare, some times  it is drastic,  sometimes  it is the changes  are 
not even  much  more  visible.  So, it can either  seasonal  change  is dropped  down  to select  three  
or four only nowadays  instead  of six very find differences  find changes  for the variati ons and 
it also impact  you this is only just one example  of how the climate  change  is affecting  the 
overall  seasonal  variation  weather  pattern . And the climatic  condition  in general.   
It also affects  the rainfall  pattern,  there  are certain  places  in the world which  started  getting 
very high amount  of rainfall,  nowadays,  especially  if you talk about  the world  scenario  India  
and China  is facing  huge  amount  of rainfall  nowadays,  whether  whereas,  there  are certain  
places  in the certain  places  in the US is exper iencing  high drought  like situations  nowadays.  
So, this change s was not expected  these  changes  are very certain  and I mean  like it was there  
for like very small  amount  of time,  the changes  should  have  cannot  be this fast and it is only 
happening  because  of the changes  in the climate  change  in a very faster  way because  of the 
anthropogenic  activities.  What  are the negative  effects  of the precipitation  on aquaculture  and how it affects  the 
aquaculture ? In general  suppose,  you have  a flooding  or the heavier  rainfall,  it will increa se 
the production  risk in the lowland  areas  because  your catch  may you know,  fly away  like it 
will because  of the flood  and flood  situation  your production  you can lose the your 
production  in general .  
It can lead to several  other  risks like the losing  fish from  the pond  during  the flood.  Invasion  
of pond  by unwanted  species  and which  can cause  them  to have  some  disease  or say like they 
can be the predator  of those  cultural  species . Damage  of pond  due to the infilling  and 
washing  away  of walls.  Also,  this heavy  rainfall  it can affect  the mixing  of pond  water  with 
the fish that is there  in the wild causing  water  quality  deterioration  and an undesired  
introduction  to the invasive  fish species . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:59) 
 
Flooding  may cause  the destruction  of the production  facilities  extremely  low rainfall  also 
can lead to the drought  events  and which  cause  drastic  changes  in the shortages  in the water  
availability  and also the world  overall  quality  deterioration  and that will definitely  have a 
major  impact  in your aqua culture.  
Variable  precipitation  in may also result  in inconsistency  in a nutrient  loading,  thus favoring  
the most  of the invasive  short -lived  algal  species  rather  than longer  lived  kelp species  usually  
suitable  for cultivation . And this shortage  is because  of the climate  change  driven  water  
shortages  lead to the increasing  conflict  of different  user groups  like agriculture,  aquac ulture,  
domestic  and industri es. Someone  will say like no, the water  should  be directed  towards  the agriculture  because  that 
will give us the more  produce  and that will that is the one of the survival  strategies . But the 
policymakers  are sometimes  they cannot  do anything  because  the limited  in water  supply,  
they will be forced  to reduce  the amount  of agricultural  demand  they post to reduce  the 
amount  of industrial  activity  or aquaculture  practices  and all. 
In general,  that will give a very huge  amount  of conflict  in conflict  of interest  between  the in 
the policymakers  in different  zones  of practices  and a ll okay . It can also increase  the 
production  cost the droughts  and all because  you have  to supply  the water  from  far away  and 
it will definitely  cost you much  more  money  than it requires  in general . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  5:23) 
 
What  are the positive  effects ? Sometimes  the flooding  it in cases  the areas  of suitable  
aquaculture  pond  in the low-lying  tropical  regions , like desert  and the plateau  regions  where  
normally  it experiences  less water . But all of a sudden,  they started  experiencing  the rainfall  
and all and it helps  them  to grow  their aquaculture  in gene ral. It also in turn favors  the local  
socio -economic  sustainability.  
Droughts  can sometimes  promote  the development  of very standard  wastewater  management  
practices.  And in a way it actually  helps  the scientific  community  to thrive  you know  for 
going  for much  how to say faster  production  of different  ideas  and new novel  technologies.  It 
is also reported  that microalgal  such as like kelp productivity,  it can affect  it can be it may be 
affected  by heavier  rainfall,  which  may bring  varied  nutrient  loading s to the nears hore 
environments.  Do you understand  the point  if you have  a high amount  of rainfall  in the near coastal  region,  
it will just simply  take away  and let you know  that because  of the washed  away  products 
from  the nutrient  from  this zone  will be coming  in contact with this near shore  water  body  it 
will take all the nutrient  load along  with them . Because  of that this nearshore  environment  
will be very high in different  nutrient  concentration.  
This is a perfect  area for this sea grasses  and different  scalps  produ ction . So, that can also the 
sea weeds,  sea grasses  can also grow  in this region.  So, it someho w has some  positive  effect  
also. But majorly  then negative  effects  are more  drastic  okay . 
(Refer  Slide Time:  7:13) 
 
 There are some  few examples  of the damage  and losses due to the flood  in general  the 
damages  to the livelihood  and the productive  assets.  It can damage  the other  destruct  the 
coastal  and inland  fishing  and the fish transport  boat engine  gear. It can wash  over the coastal  
or inland  aquaculture  pond.   
It can damage  the hatcheries  and the feed store  it can lose the fish from  your pond  it can 
damage  the onshore  processing  plant  like ice factories,  administration  buildings,  boats  sheds , 
drying  racks.  Primary  and secondary  impacts  on aquatic  ecosystem  it incre ases the amount  of 
water  provides  more  volume  and area for hiding  foraging  and growth  of aquatic  species  
during  the flood.  
It comes  in contact  with the obstacle  in fast moving  floodwaters  may damage  the fish and 
also floods  bring  land-based  pollutants  plastics, garbage , pesticides,  chemicals,  debris  and fishing  gears  and all into the coral  reefs  and also because  of that they can there  is a chance  of 
huge  amount  of damage  and possible  ghost  fishing and all okay . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  8:19) 
 
Few more  example  of damage  and losses  due to drought  rather  than the flood.  What  will 
happen ? It will damage  the livelihood  like it will reduce  the water  quantity  and the quality  
leading  to the reduced  producti on of aquaculture  and inland  fisheries . How  it will affect  the 
primary  and the secondary  impact  on how it has the primary  and secondary  impacts  on 
aquatic  ecosystem ? 
The organic  nutrients  which  are important  for this ecosystem  health  which  are transported  by 
the rivers  are reduced  because  of the reduced  water  flow. Causing  the low primary  
productivity  in coastal  areas  where  these  rivers  used to flow and because  of that overall  
ecosystem  will also be in danger  in this near shore  area okay . 
Also,  this reduced  water  in the rivers,  lakes  and reservoirs  it concentrates  the fish in smaller  
volumes of water  making  them  easier  to catch  and reduce  the amount  of space  to hide and 
available  food for growth  and all . (Refer  Slide  Time:  9:13) 
 
What  is the impact  of the sea level  rise on the aquaculture ? I hope  you know  the reason  of sea 
level  rise?  I will discuss with you about  it in coming  slides  in general  just think  about  it what  
can be the negative  impact  of sea level  rise on aquaculture ? It may lead to the destructi on of 
the several  coastal  ecosystems  like mangrove  and the salt marshes.   
If you go to the Sund arbans  area world  largest  delta  in the West  Bengal  and Bangladesh  
border  and India  Bangladesh  border . In this largest  delta  region  southern  part of it is a very 
rich mangrove  forest  is there.  One type of plant  which  is very famous  the Sundar  plant  and 
because of that it is called  Sundarban.  So, this forest  is mangrove  area is drastically  affected  
by the sea level  rise nowadays . This is also reduced  this is also causing  changes  in the 
ecosystem  in general,  it can drastically  affect  the fish stocks  and the seeds for aquaculture  
production.  
Higher  sea level  may lead to the intrusion  of saline  water  in the aquaculture  production  
facilities  like pond , cages , tanks , pens, particularly  in the lowland  areas  and what  will 
happen ? Because  suppose  the species  that you are targeting  is very much  susceptible  to 
changes  in the salinity.  Once  the sea level  intrusion,  sea water  intrusion  will happen,  because  
of that salinity  will go up and your production  will be hampered.  Other  than that, the 
salination  of groundwater  will be detrimental  to aquaculture  and the freshwater  fisheries  as 
well okay .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  10:48 ) 
 
It may also change  the species  composition , ecosystem  productivity  and organism s 
abundance  and distribution  and also phenological  shift thus,  threatening  the inland  and 
marine  aquaculture  production  in general . It can drastically  it can completely  disrupt  the 
coastal  ecosystem.  However,  it has as I told you, there is always  if there  is negative  part of it 
there  is definitely  somewhere  there  is some  positive  impact of it as well.  
Sea level  rise it actually  increase  the area’ s apt for the brackish  water  culture  in high value  
aquatic  species  like shrimp  and mud crab. Most  of the cases  we design  a tight fit tide fed farm 
and in the tide fed farm , we try to go ahead  with the production  of the shrimp  and mud crabs. 
Because  of the sea level  rise the amount  of this the conveyance  lines  and all these  systems  
pumping  and all these  things  started  becoming  this requirement  is much  lesser  than its actual  
one. Because  of that, like I mean  like the previous  stages,  because  of that, the production  
level  is increased  and with reduced  economic  application  and all okay . So, that is possible  in 
case of sea water  rise. (Refer  Slide  Time:  12:02)  
 
And if you see this picture,  you can get an overall  idea of how the sea level  rise is happening  
and what  are the effects  of it okay ? See, the excess  radiation  that is happening  and it is 
bounce d back  from  the cloud  and come  to the because  of the presence  of greenhouse  gases  it 
increases  it heats the oceanic  surfaces.  
Because  of that there  is a thermal  expansion  because  of heat the land ice started  melting  and 
because  of that, there  is a chances  of reduced  oxygen  concentration  and this reduced  oxygen  
concentration  because  of heating  and land ice melt and because  of this regional  salinification  
what  will happen ? The sea level  will keep  on rising . 
And this thermal  expansion  will and also this overal l heating  in general  what  will happen ? It 
will affect  the sea level  rise; it will be having  a very slow  process  like which  is called  like 
slow  heating.  The original  change  in the deep  water  because  what  is this slow  heating  it will 
slowly  heat and a differ ent stratum  of your aquatic  body . The carbon  dioxide  because  of the 
anthropogenic  carbon  dioxide  the sea air carbon  dioxide  flux is increased .  
And it will come  and increase  the bicarbonate  concentration  which  will definitely  cause  this 
bicarbonate  under  saturations  and also it will cause  the cell deformation  and dissolution  of 
different  minerals  which  will cause  the reduction  in the marine  minerals , shells,  coral  
skeletons  and all these  things.  
In general,  it will also cause  the high regional  high waves  in the you know  your near coastal  
region.  So, all together  this is drastically  affecting  the whole  ecosystem,  the sea level  rise 
because  of different  activities  because  of global  warming.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:58 ) 
 
What  are the impact  of uncertainty  in the external  input  supply  in aquaculture  on 
aquaculture?  First of all, what  do I mean  by the external  input ? First is capture  fisheries  
second  is agriculture.  These  two are the major  external  input  because  capture  fisheries  will 
give you the fish which  can be used as fish meal  or fish oil to produce  the culture  fisheries  to 
produce  as for feed or to produce  the feed for the culture  fisheries  right . 
Also, different  agricultural  activities  also help the providing  the ample  amount  of nutrient  for 
the aquatic  speci es to survive.  What  will happen  if the capture  fisheries  will go down  or the 
agriculture  will go down , the production  of agriculture  production  will go down ? Because  of 
the changes  in the climate  capture  fisheries  are getting  you know  potentially  it has a high 
impact  and because  of these  fluctuations  in the abundance  and the distribution  of fish species  
it has a substantial  effect  on fish meal  and fish oil supplies  in general . 
It threats  the capture  fisheries  and which  will go which  will also affect  the sustainability  of 
the fish breeding  program  due to the increased  scarcity  of the wild seeds . If you remember  we 
need  the brooder  species , instead  brooder  which we normally  used to do capture  the wild 
breeders  and all them  or we can simply  catch  the wild seeds  and we can supply  it for our 
aquaculture  production  that is not possible  because  of the changes  in the climate.  It has the 
different  fishery  resources  you know may also accelerate  like the mismanagement  which  can 
also accelerate  the mismanagement  of the capture  fisheries . (Refer  Slide  Time:  15:44 ) 
 
It is not only have  an impact  on how to say the capture  fisheries,  but also it will impact  on the 
agricultural  production  as well the climate  change . Because  the crop production  this getting  
hampered  if I tell you one story  about  it one example  of it. You know  the carbon  dioxide  
level  is rising  in the atmosphere  right ? because  of that some  types  of crops  are actually  for 
them  it is not a sustainable  situation  is not a how to say appropriate  environment  to survi ving. 
For them  the when  the carbon  dioxide  is getting  carbon  dioxide  level  is getting  increased  in 
the atmosphere,  it is in a stress  key to a situation . Once  it is in the stress  situation,  it will 
definitely  affect  the overall  agricultural  crops  and produc tion and all . Also,  this impact  is 
predicted  to lower  the availability  and increase  the cost of inputs  like fish seed and fish 
ingredients  which  is required  for the aquaculture  production  in general.  
What  is the positive  impact  of it? Rising  prices  of inputs like fish meal  and fish oil are 
expected  to accelerate  the development  of scientific  studies  to identify  the alternate  protein  
and oil sources  to replace  the traditional  ingredients  in a aquafeed . If you remember  in our 
sixth  module,  I think  we discusse d about  different  aquafeed  and what  is the standards , what  is 
the noble  aqua feed technologies  are people  are trying  to find out and which  way which  can 
replace  the fish meal  or fish oil in general ? (Refer  Slide  Time:  17:19 ) 
 
Impact  on the changing  in the sea surface  salinity  on the aquaculture , changes  in the sea 
salinity  may take place  due to the increased  evaporation  resulting  in the rising  temperature  
just try to understand . Once  if you remember  that pay figure  that we discussed  in our earlier  
slide  the temperature  sea surface  temperatures  getting  increased . 
Because  of that the evaporation  will also be increased , evaporation  it will increase  one’s the 
temperature  will increas e. The evaporation  once  the evaporation  will increase  what  will 
happen?  Suppose  you have  a water  you have  a cup of water  which  is 10 ppm,  which  has 10 
ppm.  So just like 10 ppm saline  water  is there  in a cup of water . 
Once  the water  will evaporate  what  will happen ? From  say like x a liter it will come  down  to 
x by 2 liters . What  will happen  to its salinity  level ? It will increase  like anything  right? 
because  water  will evaporate  but not the salt ions, not the ions,  ions cannot  evaporate  and 
because  of that the salt concentration  will increase . 
This is what  was happening  in the sea surface salinity  level  as well. The sea surface  salinity  is 
also getting  increased  with time because  of the increased  evaporation  rate because  of the 
rising  temperature  and also ocean  circulation  changes  okay . What  are the negative  effects  of 
it? Sea surface  salinity  may affect  the overall  oceanic  circulation  and the stratification  it can 
change  the course  of wave  pattern  and all like anything  okay . 
It leads  to the reduction  in the oceanic  capacity  to store  the heat okay , it reduces  the carbon  
and the nutrients  circulation  and also it reduces  the production  performance  of freshwater  
prawns  and the higher  salinity . And also, it can increase  the mortality  in the juvenile  clams,  in at the higher  salinity  and all. In general,  higher  salinity  is not expected  because  of that your 
production  your aquaculture  produce  can also be drastically  hampered . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:16 ) 
 
Lower  water  salinity  in the other  ways  also increase  the susceptibility  of the bacterial  
invasion  in oyster s which  is also not good . So you know , I am not talking  about  only salinity  
rises a salary  lower  is also possible  and a lower  like, reducing  the salinity  level  is also 
possible  because  of the climate  change  and that can have  a have  an impact  on the bacterial  
invasion  in the oyster  species . 
It can also increase  the species  loss and the higher  management  costs  and all. And what  is the 
positive  impact ? Definitely  it can increase  the cultivation  of the tolerant  species  which  can 
tolerate  much  higher  range  of salinity  level  in the dwelling  water  bodies and all. If you see 
this figure  sea surface  salinity  estimates  from  this space  borne  L band  radiometers  and an 
overview  of this first decade  like 2010  to 2019  this observation  is taken  from  the source  Reul 
et al 2020 . 
There  if you see the temperature  rate sciences  like you know  37, 30 this is the salinity  level  
okay , it is PPT parts  per 1000 , 38 PPT,  37 PPT, 36, 35, 34, 33, 32 something  like that. So, the 
more  the reading  nature  it means  the salinity  level  is very high if you see this Atlantic  zone  
and Atlantic  Ocean  salinity  level  is much  high the Arabic  Ocean  is in this place,  it is the this 
in the Mediterranean  in this area,  Red Sea this is having  very high salinity  level  than the other  
part of the ocean . (Refer Slide  Time:  20:55 ) 
 
What  are the impa ct of the different  severe  climatic  events  on aquaculture ? Different  climatic  
events  like cyclones , storms  and waves  high waves  are happening  okay . Because  of the 
changes  in the salinity  changes  in the water  sea, sea water temperatures . And which  can 
drast ically  affect  the aquaculture  developments  especially  in the coastal  areas  and also the 
marine  ornamental  product s and all . 
What  are the negative  impact  of it there  in the ecosystem  in the oceanic  environment?  First,  it 
can drastically  reduce  the productio n systems  examples  like cage aquaculture  systems  will 
face very high risk because  of the effect  of wave  and cyclones suppose  you have  your cage 
culture  in your pain culture  in a near shore  or say like high sea region . 
What  will happen  because  of these  high waves  and because  of the cyclonic  activities ? Your  
production  will get hampered  because  not only get hampered  right ? there  is a chance  that it 
will completely  destroy  your structures.  This aquaculture  structures  that you are cultu ring that 
you are having  in your in this high sea region  or even  the coastal  regions . 
It can increase  the management  cost it can you can lose the cultures  species  as well because  
of these  different  factors  and all. What  is the positive  impact ? It can have  a better  mixing  of 
water  column  and nutrients  and also it will minimize  the rising  temperature  pressure  by 
minimizing  the temperature  in general  because  of this proper  water  mixing  of the water  
different  water  stratum  and all . (Refer  Slide  Time:  22:29 ) 
 
There  are some  few exampl es of damage  and losses  due to the cyclones  and storms.  Because  
of the cyclones  and storms  in general  the livelihood  like if you talk about  the livelihood  and 
the productive  assets,  it will definitely  destruct  comp letely  it can destroy  the coastal  and 
inland fishing  under  fish transport  boats , engines  and fishing  gears . It can damage  the 
aquaculture  structures  as we discussed  pond , cages, or seaweed  growing  systems.  
It can damage  and destroy  the harbors and the jetties  and the sea defense  systems  and the 
onshore  processing  plants,  the drying  racks  on the smoking  houses  and all . It can, how it will 
impact  in the primary  and the secondary  like its impacts  on the aquatic  ecosystems . The ghost  
fishing  caused  by the loss of fishing  gears  which  cannot  be recovered  yet they continue  to 
fish after the disaster  has finished  in like in Hurricane  Felix in Nicaragua  it happens .  
Because  of that 17,000  lobster  crabs  were  reported  to be lost during  this event.  And this is 
called  the ghost  fishing  because  of these Nets and all they are still there  in that most  still they 
are in oceanic  bodies  they are capturi ng a lot of fishes  and all they are doing  completely  
disrupting  the nearby  ecosystem  and the ecosystem  in general . 
Which  can lose a huge  amount  of formed  aquatic  product s and not only that, you can lose a 
lot of wild aquatic  products  as well because  of that. It will damage  the beaches  and the 
nesting  areas  and sand dunes  and the coastal  shrubs  and trees  in general . (Refer  Slide  Time:  24:08 ) 
 
In this figure,  if you can find it in Barange  et al, 2018 . So, they have  mentioned  few 
significant  climatic  anomalies  and the events  that happened  in the year 2017  that you can 
identify  that you can easily  understand  how much  this climate  change  is happening  it is like 
how much  it is how real it is and how it is affecting  all the other  parts  of all the different  
places  in the in the earth  definitely  in a very drastic  way.  
Some  part is getting  benefited  in that but the that examples  are very few, just to give you a 
couple  of examples  in the Alaskan  region,  if you go to the Alaska  regions,  they are the it has 
a in 2017  the Nove mber , they have  the temper  average  temperature  of almost  9.1 degrees  
Celsius  higher  than the average.  
If you go to the Canada  region , Canada  and we will go to the Arctic  Sea ice extent  and all in 
the top, if you see the Arctic  Sea area,  so it reaches  its eighth  smallest  minimum  extent  in 
record,  and in this during  the 2017  growth  season,  the Arctic  had the smallest  annual  
maximum  extent,  what  do you mean  by annual  maximum  extent ? 
It means  the area at which  the Arctic  this ice sheets  are actually  extended  it is called  the 
maximum  extent  annual  maximum  extent . In 2017,  it reached  its minimum  value  the smallest  
value,  same  way the Atlantic  Sea extent  also the same . In Atlantic  also in the during  the 
growth  season  in 2017.  It also had the second  smallest  annual  maximum  extent,  which  is 
something  to really  worry  about . 
And this is the discussion  that we had this is the data that we have  it from  2017 , in 2021,  it 
reaches  further  below  and it is very something  that is to be, people  should  be very much  worry  about  okay . And it is not about  something  only climate  change  and it does not have  it 
is does not have  any influ ence in your life, you can say okay , this is something  to be, only the 
scientists  can think  about  it, they will be policymakers.  
It is it comes  from  the individuals  okay  it is not any particular  policymakers  cannot  do drastic  
changes  in it, they can do some  stuff,  but definitely,  your contribution  will make  a majo r 
change  in it as well.  In general,  if you see the oceanic  activities  in the Southwest  Pacific  
Ocean,  if you go to the Western  Pacific  Ocean  go to the Australian  cyclone  season  and all . 
They  receive  around  below  average  or near average  amount  of ocean ic activity,  Typhoon  
activity . They received  in general,  if I give you an example,  in the in North  Indian  Ocean  
cyclone  season,  they received  near average  activity  four storms  and two cyclones  in 2017.  
If you go to the South  West  Pacific  Ocean,  they recieves  below average  activi ty, only six 
storms  and three  cyclonic  activity.  Now,  if you go to the Atlantic  region,  if you go to the 
Atlantic  hurricane  season,  there  receives  much  higher  than the average  activity.  There  was a 
most  active  season  since  2005,  and seven  most  active  seaso n in record  in that region,  with 17 
storms  and 10 hurricanes.  
Same  way it is like Hurricane,  I think  you remember  the Hurricane  Harvey,  Irma and Maria,  
they drastically  affect  this Atlantic  belt. And it changes  this, the course  of the costs a trillion  
of amount  of like damages.  I mean,  like the valuation  of damages  in this region.  So, in 
general,  in the European  situation  if you  see the Portugal,  if you go in general,  they been  
Portugal,  it was the fourth  driest  year on record  in 2017.  
And in Bangladesh,  India,  Nepal  they receive  the huge  amount  of this torrential  rainfall  
during  the August  of 2017.  In general,  what  I mean  to say these  are only some  anomalies  that 
is affecting  if you see these  are only couple  of dots that you are seeing  right now,  there  are 
thousands  of them . Thousands  of changes  are happening  because  of the changes  in the 
climate  change.  
And it is definitely  from  your basic  idea,  you can identify  that it will definitely  impact  the 
human  life as well as all the activities  that we are doing  all the production  related  activities  
that we are doing  in general.  So, it will it will affect  the aquaculture  it can affect  the 
agriculture  and if it will affect  this aquaculture  capture fisheries , culture  fisheries  and all . It will defini tely affect  the human  food behavior  and food consumption  nature  and all. It will 
increase  the amount  I mean  like the rate of production  of food and definitely  it will be very 
hard and the you know  how to say the cost of leaving  will be will have  a very drastic impact  
because  of that okay . 
(Refer  Slide Time:  29:37 ) 
 
I hope  you have  some  basic  ideas  some  good  amount  of information  about  the effect  of 
climatic  changes  on aquaculture  in general.  So in conclusion,  we can say we discuss  about  
the flooding,  how flooding  or the heavier  rainfall  increases  the production  risks  in the 
lowland  areas , we discussed  about  the extremely  low rainfall , also may lead to the drought  
events  and causing  the water  shortage  and the quality  deterioration  for your aquaculture.  
Captu re fisheries  and agriculture  are one of the major  sources  of external  input  for 
aquaculture  production , thus,  any threat  to them  will be potentially  detrimental  for your 
aquaculture  production.  Salinization  of groundwater  will be detrimental  for aquacultur e and 
freshwater  not only groundwater,  but also for which  we can talk about  the sea water  as well.  
Severe  climatic  events  like cyclones , storms , waves  are expected  to affect  the aquaculture  
development  especially  in the coastal  areas  and the marine  ornamen tal products.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  30:32 ) 
 
The major  takeaways  from  this lecture  matter  and I would  say the we discuss  about  the how 
heavy  rainfall  effects  and changes  in the rainfall  can affect  the aquaculture  production . 
Impact  of climatic  change  on agriculture  and capture  fisheries,  how it can you know  
interrelated  to the production  of aquaculture . Variation  of sea surface  salinity  and how it can 
affect  the ocean  circulation  and stratification.  
Also,  we discuss  about  the threat  to the capture  fisheries,  which  can have  an effect  have  an 
effect  on the sustai nability  of the fish breeding  program  due to the increased  scarcity  of wild 
seeds.  And in at the end, we discussed  about  different  climatic  event  different  climatic  
anomal ies that we are experiencing  in different  parts  of the world  nowadays.  And definitely  it 
has a very huge  impact  on the aquaculture  in general.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  31:28 ) 
 
So, these  are the references  that you can follow  to get more  information  about  climate  
change,  impact  on aquaculture . I hope  you get to know  some  very good  amount  of 
information  about  the impact  of climate  change  on aquaculture  and I am very happy  that to 
help you out in future  as well okay . So, we will see you in the next lecture.  Thank  you so 
much.  