Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and  Food Engineering   
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 51  
Fish and Fish Products Preservation  
Hello everyone . Welcome  to the first  lecture of 11th module of aquaculture industries . So,  
here we  will be discussing about the Fish and Fish Products Preservation  and my name is 
Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick. I am  from the Department of Agriculture Food 
Engineering of Indian Institute of Te chnology, K haragpur .  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:41)  
 
  
The concepts that I  will be covering in this particular lecture mat erial are the  fish utilization 
and processing , different processing technologies, chilling or freezing , freezing methods and 
classification of freezers .  (Refer Slide Time: 00:57)  
 
First of all, to start with in this module , the whole module I  will be discussing about different 
fish preservation techniques in details  and also  you know like till  now whatever we have 
discussed it  is mostly  focusing on aquaculture and all these things . I mean like aquaculture , 
how we develop , how we farm and all . But just realize that farming is not at the , not like the 
whole .  
You have to in order to complete the proc ess, once you have , once you harvest your fish 
harvest your aquatic species then it has to reach to the customer , it has to reach to the plate of 
the consumer . So,  this process actually , it is like one of the major burden in aquaculture 
industries .  
Why I am saying burden because this is highly perishable item , all the aquatic  spaces . The  
moment you  are taking it out of the aquatic , this water body , it is highly perishable.  The 
moment they  will die the re will like there are different  enzymatic activities go ing on in their 
body and all because of that  they will  it is a very highly perishable items . So, what we need to 
do?  
We need to process  it precisely and in such a way , so that it will be readily available and it 
can be  available to the customer or say like you can directly put into the plates of the 
consumer  but in a  manner which they want . So, suppose  I am just giving you one  example . In 
Indian context we really like the hils a fish and all . So, it is like one  of the delicacy and all .  But the one major  problem is it has a lot of bones which is not a very standard way of  eating 
in the western world. So,  what they normally try to have food which have fish which is 
already  deboned . So,  in order to export the material from here to say like in a  western 
coun try, if you want them to eat your food , eat the food from the Indian scenario Indian  
context , what we need to do ?  
We need to debone it and then only we can supply it or we can do it other  way. We can just 
supply it and then they can have the deboning in  instrument there itself and all . However, it is 
very important that  you know your customer you know your market , based  on that  you let 
alone  this, not only the all the produce but all the catch from the  seller capture fisheries , all 
the produce from your cultural fisheries  has to be well managed .  
So, first of all because  it is a perishable item , so, you have to preserve it . That is one of the 
major problem . You have  to preserve it p roperly and then only you can  do further proces sing 
and all for  further expectation to meet  the market expectation or . So, first and foremost thing 
is preservations and all . So, that is very important .  
We will discuss about all these things during these five lectures  in this module . So,  I hope 
you wil l be having at least some basic idea that what are the procedures that we need to 
follow  when we go ahead with  the, what we do with the aquaculture produce , what we do and 
what are the process that involves after we harvest them from the aquatic  body .  
You know this aquaculture;  it is like highly diversified  in terms of species processing and the 
product forms dist ined for food or say non-food users  and all . And also, as I discussed , it is a 
perishable , highly perishable food and because of that we need to preserve  in order to we 
need to go ahead with this proper fish utilization and processing units to preserve the fish  
quality and the nutritional attributes and also, we have to avoid any microbial  contamination 
or any other foreign species called contamination , loss and waste of our harvested produce , 
harvested  rearing animals .  
So, rearing aquatic spaces . In general,  in 2008 like almost 88  percent of the total fish 
production was utilized for direct hu man consumption . Remaining  12 percent is for the non -
food purposes . What  are the non-food purposes?  First is out of those 12-percentage  80 
percent is actually used for  fishmeal  and the fish oil . Just see the iron y like you have to 
produce fish to  replenish institutional  provide the  food for , as a fee d for another type of fish.  Like,  if you realize like it is said that  it is a, they just say that  if you go to the Scandinavian 
countries around their fishes are very good and  all they do all the things in a very organical , 
organic way and all . However , those fish when they  are cultured , all the culture , like when 
the culture is done for them they need the fishmeal . So, where  this fish are coming from ?  
They  are coming from all this  a non-regulated  capture fissure is way . So,  they this capture 
fisheries  is happening in the Atlantic region , in the  Mediterranean regions which are 
unregular , which are like not  under , which is not like  proper  jurisdictionary way . So, that has 
been done .  
It is not all that it  is just if you see the report , if you see the proper survey , it is being done for 
long and that fish actually been transported to these Scandinavian part, Scandinavian partners  
and all . So, they use it as a fishmeal and all . So, see in one  way you  are saying organic but it 
is actually in one way you  are saying you  are adhering to all the  regulatory bodies , rules and 
all.  
But in the other way it is actual detrimental for the ecosystem . Because  it is actually utilizing 
a huge amount of fishmeal  and for that it goes for , it captures a huge amount of capture d 
fisheries a culture it uses a huge amount of culture capture fisheries . Anyway,  to just to give 
you an idea like  how like most of this fish is utilized for  other fish culture  itself . And rest of 
the 20 percent of this 12 percent of total  value is  actually utilized for , utilize d as ornamental 
fish for culture as bait or  in pharmaceutical uses , for p et food or for raw material for animal 
feeds and  all.  (Refer Slide Time: 07:23)  
 
What  is the fish product utilization?  As we discussed  on human consumption and  non-food 
purposes . Almost  44 percent of these human consumptions  are the liv e form or fresh or 
chilled form . Because they in this three form  like either it  is a live fish , it is a fresh and like or 
like just chilled fish then it is the most  preferred and you will get maximum amount of 
economic benefit or return from the market if your fish is  having this  considered under this 
categories .  
35 percent of the share is frozen fish  products . 11 percent prepared or the preserved fish and 
10 percent use the cured fish , after curing is done . Freezing is like you might have  a know 
about what is li ve fish, what is definitely what is live fish and what is chilling and all . So,  
freezing is another  technique .  
Freezing  represents the main like one of the main method for preserving the fish like we do it 
in refrigeration to preserve our food , the same way . But there is difference between chilling 
freezing and different  different t ype of freezing as well . I will come to you  come , I will 
discuss about all this thing in coming  slides . However,  in this freezing , it accounts for almost 
62 percent of all processed  fish for human consumptions .  (Refer Slide Time: 08:48)  
 
So, in general , if you see this graph given by  this Food and Agriculture Organization 2020 , 
this is the utilization of the fisheries  and aquaculture production in developed versus 
developing country . If you see this orange line, it is actually showing the one which is be en 
done in the developing countries , in the  blue line is  showing the , it is representing the 
developed countries .  
In developing countries , they are utilizing the fish at its best form , most  of the cases . They 
have it in either liv e, fresh or chilled form . In for developed  countries , most of them are 
situated in the temperature or like  polar  region , so, because I mean like near polar region , 
because of that what happened ?  
They do not have access to much of , like they have access , they have their specific t ype of 
fish and all but they prefer to go for these frozen fishes  and all. Frozen  fish, cured fish or 
prepared or prepared food , prepared  fish and all . That is what in general developed countries 
they prefer .  
But in our case , we know in Indian context , if I talk about the live food is , live fish is much 
more preferred than  the cured one or say like the frozen  one. So, it is very typical that we  find 
it awkward to  when we go outside and we have we are buying stuff from  the supermarket 
which are frozen fish and which is like there for like long and it  is pocketed  and it is coming 
from far away and you collect it and you have it .  So, it is like very normal outside India but in India it  is we normally go for live fish . We go in 
the morning and we b uy it like it is becoming more normal though times are changing . In 
metropolitan cities it  is not possible  so, they do it . They go to this different  retail markets and 
all they buy it from there .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:43)  
 
Anyway . So,  let us  discuss about different preservation technologies . So,  what are the 
technologies that is  available and why we gonna do that ? First of all , you know that fish 
body;  it contains proteins , fats, minerals , vitamins , amino acids , iodine , phosphorus and also  
large amount of water .  
Because  of the presence of all these things they can , once they are dead , they can be spoiled 
very easily because of the pr ocess called decomposition. T hat is the reason , in order to get rid 
of this decomposition process;  we need to go  ahead with the  different preservation techniques 
or methods .  
However,  like one of them on another  major reason is the fish in , it does have some living 
bacteria in its scale . However,  they are not , they cannot attack the when it is in  living 
condition . The moment it died , what happens they attack their various body constituents , the 
moment it dies , this fish .  
So, that is also another one of the major reason that we need to get rid of this , all this 
microbiota that is  present in their scales also , we nee d to make them either dormant condition 
and also somehow by using this different preservation technologies . In general , in our country the  preservation technology that we normally follow the chilling or freezing , curing 
like drying , salting or smoking , canning.  
So, these are the technologies that we normally follow . I hope from I before going into details 
from this name itself  you could understand.  Chilling,  first chilling or freezing . You do low 
temperature preservation and techniques  you use it . Then  you do the curing by either dry it . 
Because once you dry it,  one of the major reason of curing is what ? In order to you have to 
get reduce the water activity . The moment you will reduce the water activity . How  we can do  
that?  
You can do for go for drying . So,  it will reduce its water content . Salting , you can do this 
smoking and all . So, all these things , what will happen because of that ? Its water activity will 
be reduced . Because  of that there is  a less chance of contamination . Then  the canning . You 
put it in the can . You put it in the proper packaging of  your product for maximum amount of; 
you can preserve it for  maximum amount of  time.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:08)  
 
So, to start with , let us start with the chilling . So,  chilling is like one of the f ast and the 
simplest method  to preserve and process fish. It preserves the fish by decreasing the  rate of 
undesirable biochemical and the chemical reactions and also it hinders the growth and 
spoilage activity of  different microorganisms , specially , the differ ent enzymes . How it is 
done ?   It is normally done by covering the fish with a layer of ice . The ratio of  fish t o ice is 1 is to 1 
to 1 is to 2. Remember,  so, this is very important . Especially,  for capture fisheries  when these 
trailers , the fish trailers they go for capturing the  fish from the like the deep sea and all . So, 
they have to arrange , they have to ready with this ice blocks and all .  
So, the moment they capture the fish they go  for chilling  because this is the one of the lowes t 
energy consuming  process of preservation . Then  this, because of that what  happened in case 
of chilling ? These automatic enzymatic activities  are also checked because of this  lower 
temperature is assumption  and all . What  are the methods that we can adopt  during this 
chilling process?  
Conventional flake ice, slurry ice , refrigerated seawater;  you can go for ozonized refrigerated 
water or dry ice or solid carbon dioxide . This conventional fl ake ice sometimes , we add it 
with the salt , certain percentage of s alt, sodium chloride . What will happen? It  reduces 
freezing temperature because of  that it can stay for long .  
So, that is also another way of  preserving it . So, this is the different  methods that we normally 
adopt during the ch illing procedure . The storage life of chilled fish is  limited to 2 to 18 days 
depending on the species because you cannot expect it to stay any longer , they even if it is in 
the chilling temperature but still  different kind of cyclophilic  microorganisms and also 
different kind of reactions , the chemicals that is secreting inside the  fish body .  
So, I will discuss with you details . Like what are those  chemicals and what how it happens . 
So, in general , it is self-detrimental.  It is like  self-cleaning  killing  kind of activity . I mean like 
it will  start decomposing even at chilling temperature also . So, that is why the next thing that 
we need to realize that  we need to go for some preservation techniques which can preserve it 
for much longer time .  (Refer Slide Time: 15:45)  
 
Freezing  is one of this . In case of freezing , what is happening ? It is by reducing the 
temperature at which any  chemical reaction can take place and also by lowering the water 
activity which inhibits the microbial growth , we introduce freezing . Which is like at least 
minus 10 or  colder  minus , 10 degree Celsius or colder .  
Freezing is one of the most popular means of preservations and it can also  be used for 
preserving fish quality on board a sh ip and throughout the cold chain of product distribution . 
Freezing process aims to decrease the bacterial growth and the reaction rate of enzymes by 
converting the water in  the fish body into ice crystal . So, now, the available water for the 
enzymatic  activity to take place is 0. So,  because of that it will not take  place at all . So,  
because of that it wi ll not go decompose very easily.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:38 ) 
 
What  are the effects , physical chemical effects  that is happening inside the fish body , when 
we go for  freezing ? First is change in texture .  Second is  flavor and the change in odor, color 
change  and desiccation . So, when you , it is not always like  the best process . There  is nothing 
called the be st process . There is something that there  is, any process comes with their pros 
and cons .  
Freezing also comes with your con s part or the disadvantages . So,  here what is  the 
disadvantage ? First of all , you see , the loss of quality in case of frozen product . It is there . If 
you freeze any  product for like very long amount of time , you will say , you will feel the 
difference in the texture of the  material . What  is it?  
First of all , the texture change is related to the protein denaturation , which is results in  
decreased solubility which actually in turn leads to dryness and the toughness of your product 
because of the protein denaturation . Second thing , the second changes is  its flavor or od our 
changes . It mainly happens because of the loss of fresh  fish odor or development of rancidity 
due to the oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids in the fish lipid . This is  one of the major 
reason that even in the freezing condition also there is a chance that it may go wrong  after a 
couple of days or weeks of preservation .  
However,  it depends upon the  different factors that will be discussing you  now.  But believe 
me this to our major changes that also you might  have witnessed also whenever you will put 
your aquatic any animal like  seafood or  this fresh water fish or something . You put it in the 
deep  freeze .  You try to put it for a long period of time , you will see t he difference . It will not taste the 
same , though  people say like , okay;  so, we can put it in the deep fridge , it will stay for like 
weeks and weeks . No. You do not do that . You  try to have it as soon as possible . Unless  and 
until, you are staying in a northern pole and you need to have your meat for your polar bear 
or ready for next 6 months .  
So, try to  have your fish as soon as possible , even if it is in the fridge . Because it will lose the 
texture and it  does not taste that the same way that it normal ly tastes . What is the extent of 
these changes  and what are the depending factor of it ? First,  the species of fish . So, first the 
species  of fish . Is it a lean body or is it having a fatty body ?  
And the season when caught is like at  that time whether it has high fat content or low fat 
content . How does  it matter ? You realize  the changes in  flavor and odor happens because of 
the polyunsaturated fatty acids . What is fatty acid ? It is a fat . So, the more the fatty the fishes 
or the aquat ic species , there is a high chance of it  gets grants it . It very easily .  
Second thing is the  location of the  lipid. Is it intramuscular or organ based ? If it is organ 
based still  you can just remove the organ , you can still have the its taste left . But  if it is like 
intramuscular . No, Definitely no . It will competence it  complete  aquatic spe cies. Extent of 
the lipid hydrolysis generating  free fatty acids . What is the percentage of this kind of lipid 
hydrolysis  generating free  fatty acids present in your  fish? Fourth  is onboard handling .  
Like how fresh it was when you put it  for freezing . If do you wait for like whether it was 
captured from the deep  sea and were in the chilled condition for like 4 or 5 days? By that 
time, it will already start decomposing . There  will be like some decomposing very initial 
stage of decomposition will start . After then if  you preserve it and the same time if you 
directly catch it and start put it in the freezer , these two situation is  differe nt. In the first case , 
there is a high chance it will go bad very soon . In the second case , it will stay for long .  (Refer Slide Time: 21:04 ) 
 
Third  changes that you can witness is  like the color change , mainly  we call it rusting also . 
Though it  is not the same rusting with the metal body , it is different rusting . It occurred due 
to the reaction of the proteins with the lipid oxidation products on the surface of the  fish via 
non-enzymatic  browning reactions.  
In general , whenever this kind of non -enzymatic ground reactions happen , it changes the 
color of the fish . I mean like the surface color of the fish . This glazing and proper packaging 
can help prevent these effects by excluding oxygen and light . Most of the cases , this rusting 
happen . Why it is called rusting ?  
Which  is similar to the metal body . Because it requires oxygen  and light. If you preserve it 
perfectly in a dark conditi on with no oxygen condition, I mean like it is reduced oxygen 
condition , it can stay for long. Fourth  is like the desiccation on the freezer burn . It occurs at 
the product surface and is caused by the protein  denaturation as the surface becomes 
progressively drier and drier .  
So, this desiccation  you know like desiccation , desiccation means like in it  is like it  is a 
process  by which we try to dry the , dry our sample and all . You might have heard in your lab , 
chemistry lab the desiccators  and all . So, it has these crystals  and all which will consume  the 
moisture from your sample and it will make your samp le intact without  the presence of any 
moisture , it will not go bad . Same way , this desiccation happens . And we can how we can 
help it ? We can glaze it with glaze the surface or package it properly and  so, to give it a 
protective layer to prevent this kind of incident to happen .  (Refer Slide Time: 22:54)  
 
What are the freezing systems ? You know, in the Carnot cycle on a refrigeration  you have 
heard about it . Like it has these different units’  compressor , condenser , expansion valve and  
evaporators . I really request all of you to go ahead and Google it how refrigeration  works . So, 
you will be very happy , you will be in a Google if you search it how refrigeration systems 
works .  
So, you will get to know a lot of videos  and all that will definitely help you to understand it 
much better like how this phrasing system works . What  are the  classification of freezers ? 
Like by means of heat extractions , we call them mechanical or cryogenic . By the rate of 
freezing , sometimes , we call them slow freezers like  0.2 centimeter per hour only , rapid 
freezer  5 to 10 centimeter per hour , quick freezer 0.523 and  ultra-rapid  freezes which 10 to 
100 centimeter  per hour.  It consumes a  huge amount of energy though.  (Refer Slide Time: 23:47)  
 
What  are the different methods that is available ? First,  blast freezing , which is like you are 
providing a flux of cold air , minus 40 degree Celsius  cold air at a very high speed over the 
seafood in a r oom or ove r or in a under a conveyor belt. What  will happe n? The moment 
suppose , it will go , the conveyor belt is moving , there is like one chamber just like when you 
go to the airport , they check your baggages and all . It is like the same .  
So, the structure is the same . So, the conveyor belt will moving . It will come into the , it will 
stay in the , they will be having certain retention  time inside the chamber . And in the inside 
chamber , it will  thrust  the high flux of  cold air and because of that it is called blast freezing . 
And because of that it will get fr eezed very fast . Contact freezing . Fish is in direct  contact 
with the cold metal surface .  
A cryogenic freezing . We use the  liquid nitrogen for freezing it cryogenically . You know 
liquid nitrogen is like minus 120 , 190 degree Celsius  and all . So, it is like it  is in very ultra-
freezing  state. Immersion freezing . Fish product is immersed in a super cooled aqua solution 
sometimes . So, all these processes are there by which we can do the freezing of your aquatic 
species .  
Now,  it is all  more and more sophi sticular techniques are coming out . But it has to be  
acceptable to  the fishing industry and has to be as low cost as possible . What  are the methods , 
in general , we provide while doing the freezing ? It is like pressure shift freezing , 
impingement freezing , magnetic freezing, hydrochloride freezing  etcetera .  (Refer Slide Time: 25:38 ) 
 
So, how does air blast freezing works ? It is one of the simplest and effective freezing  systems 
which used  like different varieties of shaped products in a batch or in conti nuous operation . 
You provide this air blast and some at very low cost , low temperature  and all.  It will be used 
for individual s hrimps,  prawns , fillets , fish fingers and other  coated products also .  
The different designs can be blast freezers , spiral freezers , fluidized bed fridges and etcetera, 
etcetera . So,  if you want to know more in details , I think in this stage , you do  not have to 
know more in details . The moment  you will become , you will do any specialized course on 
food processing or  like aquatic species processing industries  and all , then you  can start 
understanding;  you can start learning all these things in details .  
The packaging is very important to  reduce this kind , this unnecessary. The  defrosting  thing  to 
happen . What  is defrosting things ? There is a chance like the systems required very frequent  
defrosting . Because  the water vapor which is coming from the  fish it accumulates as ice on 
the colder evaporator surfaces and all .  
This evaporator surfaces has to be , because of that it has to be , you have to  keep on defrosting 
it. Defrosting  means you have to go warm it , warm it very frequently in order to get rid of 
this, all this moisture and all . Packaging . If you do the proper packaging  and then you put it 
in the air blast  freezer , it will reduce this effect drastically .  (Refer Slide Time: 27:17)  
 
See this air blast  freezer . I told you  this conveyor belt it  is coming out of these systems  and it 
becomes very solid in nature and because of all the  moisture present  in its body is converted 
into ice . The fluidized bed freezes . You can see the air, the cold air is  flowing from the 
bottom and because of its like it  is a fluidized condition . So, why is a fluidized condition?  
Because  of its because of this air , it will be in air , it will be , so, larger surface area  of the 
product will be in touch with this cold air and  because of the efficiency can be much higher . 
These  spiral freezers are there . There it will get , you will get much more contact  time based 
on your species and requirements of your market demand .  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:02)  
 Immersion type of freezes that  we discussed , it needs to be  you need to provide some proper 
contact time  between the freezing medium and the product and its modal product has to b e 
properly  packed to prevent the direct contact with the medium . We can provide brine , 
calcium chloride , ethylene glycol or  propylene glycol which is used as it is heat transfer 
medium . And this freezing medium can be spread onto the  product or simply cons ist of 
immersion tank of hydrated freezing medium which throw , which the product  will pass .  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:36)  
 
Then  there comes the plate freezers which can be horizontal . If you see the right ones or the 
vertical in  the left one . So,  horizontal plate freezers like pe rfect for regular shaped  fish 
products such as fillets, blocks , packages  mince or surimi type of . And vertical plate freezers 
I like onboard systems for whole fish where the speed of loading and the quick discharge of 
the frozen product are  essential . And frozen  blocks can be 2.5 to 13-centimeter -thick  and 
discharges by  the ramps operating from the above below or by the side .  (Refer Slide Time: 29:10)  
 
Then  there comes the  cryogenic freezers . We use a liquid nitrogen or the liquid carbon 
dioxide or  in direct contact with the product . It gives a very fast freezing rates  through 
sublimation of the refrigerant and the system is very simple in design and operation . But the 
refrigerants  are expensive . So, the system , though the system design is very easy but 
sometimes  is because the refrigerants are so expensive , it may increase the cost of your 
product , final product. H owever , it is best suited for high value product like shrimps  and 
prawns .  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:49)  
 What  are the other types of freezings?  Like pressure shift freezing . In this method like high , 
like it is waterized transition is depressed by using high isostatic pressure like almost more 
than 100 Mega  Pascal , almost like 100,  like 10 to the power 6 Pascal . So,  product can be 
cooled  sufficiently using this process like almost minus  22 degree Celsius,  even more .  
And which is beneficial . Because , and at the end the pressure is released  to induce the 
nucleation throughout the  product. So, it gives the final your product a very nice  texture and 
water binding . But with the cost is very high . Because you have to  provide some equipment 
which can cause ver y high pressure to your systems.  
Impingement  freezing or jet or jets of fluids are directed  at product  surface at a very high 
velocity 20 to 30 meter per second and which breaks the static boundary of gas around the  
product , resulting turbulent medium around the products  which makes the heat exchange 
much more effective . It is best s uited for products with a very high surface area to weight 
ratio. No thicker than 2 centimeter .  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:09)  
 
What  are the other type of freezing methods ? Like the magnetic freezing . What  we are doing 
here the magnetic freezing s, they the wa ter molecules , all the mole cules they constantly in a 
different  state of  locomotions . We call them orientation like in a vibration state, spinning 
states and all . So, all these things like  this transitional and all .  
So, anyway . So, here, what we do ? We use the se water molecules which water molecules in 
magnetic structure , in a magnetic reactor where they are used this water molecules to orient , deorient and orient and vibrate and also spin , to prevent the clustering during the  cooling 
process . And becaus e of that it promotes the super cooling  phenomena .  
Because  of the super cooling which generates a very small ice crystals throughout the frozen 
product , it prevents the cell destruction and helps to maintain the food quality intact after , 
even after thawi ng. L ike sardine freezing and all . Another  important thing , another  important 
technology is like hydro fluidization freezing . In case of hydro fluidization freezing which  is 
actually this like  kind of combination  of immersion freezing and forced liquid fluidizations.  
Normally  any aqua solution with a very , at a very low temperature is used  as a liquid 
refrigerant and it is pumped upwards through the orifice into a container where the product is 
loaded  and thereby creating a turbulent a gitation . Now,  the product , this produces a hydro 
fluidized bed of highly  turbulent liquid and moving food products . Thus , achieving a very 
high heat transfer efficiency because of higher  specific surface area exposed to it .  
(Refer Slide Time: 33:0 5) 
 
So, all these methods that is available . So, I am not going into details of it . Just to give you a 
very brief idea , very overall  idea, what are the procedures that we normally follow in case of 
these freezings  and all , so that you will get  to know some basic informations . The more 
detailed information if you want , you can go ahead and Google it .  
You can find very interesting informations about each and every process  and I  would really 
prefer you to do that , so that it will enhance your own knowledge abo ut this particular 
subject . In general , as a conclusion I can say fish and fish products , they are very much perishable and we need to go ahead with  different processing and preservation techniques and 
freezing  is one of the most effective one .  
(Refer Sli de Time: 33:52)  
 
And however , in general , this freezing , it modifies the structure and the chemical properties 
of muscle and it  increases the  fatty acid , free fatty acid content and the liquid oxidation 
production . And  because of that  like what will happen ? So, actually it will be the decreasing . 
So, decreasing this f ree fatty acid content and the lipid oxidation products and because of that 
it will be  much more effective in case of when you go for this freezing and all . So,  main 
objective is minimize  the microbial load , reduce the enzymatic activity and preserve the 
flavor and the nutritional property of your species .  (Refer Slide Time: 34:29 ) 
 
These are the  references that you can follow and thank you  so much . I hope you get to know  
some ver y basic details about how it works  the different preservation techniques and all . We 
will for the next four  modules also , for lecture material for this module also I will be 
discussing more in details about different other preservation technologies and all . So, to give 
you some overall idea how the fish processing industries  work and how different  aquatic 
spaces processing  and preservation technology works . So, thank you . So, much see you in the 
next lecture . 