Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor G ourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 50  
Eco-labelling  
Hello everyone, welcome to the 5th lecture material of module 10 Technology of Cleaner 
Production . Here, I will be discussing today about the e co-labelling. My name is Professor 
Gourav Dhar Bhowmick , I am  from the Agriculture and Food Engineering Department of 
IIT, Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:42)  
 
The discussions that I  will mainly be covering in this particular lecture material are the 
different in what is eco-labelling , the introduction to eco-labelling , what are the different 
categories of seafood eco-labelling,  what is the Food and Agriculture Organization's 
guidelines on eco-labelling,  and the conce rns with eco-labelling.   
I think from the name itself, you do have some idea about like what is labelling , we kind of 
give a consent or like kind of  say from the regulatory bodies that this particular product is 
appropriat e for th is particular type of users.  That is  why we go ahead with this kind of 
labelling  techniques .  
That is  how the labelling  works. That is  how we label it , like in Indian context, like if it is a 
very food processing  items that you  are having, it has t o go thr ough this FSS AI. This FSS AI this is like kind of  regulatory body for this kind of, they will give you the certification for 
your food quality . So, it is just like that only.  
Like in civil structure, we have some code , like we have BIS codes and als o this i s like that 
thing. So, we also have in aquaculture  engineering in aquaculture technology in fisheries 
engineering or fisheries technology, we call them eco-labelling . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:09)  
 
 
Let us  discuss about it in more detail. In g eneral, it is a method of environmental performance 
certification and labelling  that is practiced all around the world . So, ecolabel s are normally 
kind of approval seal given to products that are considered to have fewer environmental 
impacts than other fu nctionally or c ompetitively similar products. It will also give you , it is like, it is kind of developed by the government's third -party  organization or even sometimes 
the manufacturer itself independent ly. 
They can also certify themselves , it is like kind  of self-declar ation, like we write something 
and we go for some adventure sports and we put that we do it , self-do the self-declaration , 
like you are labelling  it, like if something happened to me, no one is responsible for that. I am 
the one I am doing , it is something  like that. The manufacturers can do it by themselves also . 
So, anyway, so this is called an eco-labelling , it is a method of environmental performance 
certification or kind of  approval seal given by different bodies , regulatory bodies to di fferent 
product s. Government of India, they launched the first ecolabel scheme called Eco -mark 
through the Central Pollution Control Board in 1991 . 
Central Pollution Control Board , it is a regulatory body , it is a central government regulated 
body , their m ain house , main  center is in Delhi and they are the one who kind of control the 
whole India's industry waste and the agriculture waste,  all the waste that is being , 
municipality waste  all the waste that has been generated what will be the final level of it , 
what will be the maximum threshold limit of any particular concern ed chemicals and 
compounds or elements are actually governed by this particular body . 
So, some of the examples of famous eco-labels  are like International Energy Star, Japanese 
Eco Mark , UK BRE EAM and USA Green Seal. They are the very famous , I think you have 
heard of all these eco-labelling  things when if you  are very, like, se a foodie or people . So, 
ecolabel s are vital for promoting the international sustainable consumption and the 
produc tion policies a nd it can reduce the negative impact of consumption and production on 
the environment, climate health and the natural resources.  
In aquaculture, the goal of eco-labelling  is to promote the sustainably managed fisheries and 
highlight their pr oducts to the c onsumers. Also, the ecolabels  for fish and  the seafood are 
mainly developed by the International Food and Agriculture Organization FAO, I think you 
have heard of this organization definitely , it is one of the major regulatory bodies in this 
world in terms of food and any agricultural based product or byproducts . 
They certify that the species are harvested and raised in a sustainable manner , it is kind of 
their determinations se al like they  are kind of confirming you that this particular mater ial, this particular food product , or particular byproduct is maintain ed its sustainable production 
pathway. And now, you can have it , you can use it for the purpose that you  are choosing it to . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:32)  
 
Through this eco-label  producers and the service  providers they validate that they comply 
with the high standards of environmental protection during the lifecycle of the provided 
services or the product that they have developed or they are selling . One of the first eco-
labelling  problem t hat was introdu ced i n the world is by Germany and it called Blue Angel 
and it was developed in the year 1977.  
If you see this a quaculture value chain procedure, this resource management in general 
suppose the eco-labelling  is actually, if you see it is normally promoted by the government , 
scientist, actually, they are doing the study and the kind of form this eco-labelling  structure , 
then they inform the government, this ENGOs, environmental non-governmental  
organizations, what their duty, they also p romote  it, they promo te this kind of eco -labelling s 
and all . 
And what they  are certifying, they  are certifying the wholesalers, retailers or the restaurants 
of food industry . Eco-labelling , they are certifying the wild capture fisheries, they are 
certifyin g the aquaculture val ue chain, it  can be the resource management, any part of the 
pathways between the resource management, production of fish farming or even the market 
value determination . All these things are certified by this particular eco-labelling  and which have been , which is 
norm ally been promoted by government and the ENGOs and studied and researched by the 
scientist or the experts on that particular field. So, that is how the whole picture looks like.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:27)  
 
If you discuss ab out the different cat egories of s eafood labelling , there are like first party 
labelling , there are second party labelling . What is first party labelling ? It usually established 
by the individual companies based on their own product standard. This is kind o f the thing 
that we d iscussed , I told you , kind of self -declaration . 
This can be the based on the specific environmental issues known to inform customer through 
the advertising or media, it is like they  are saying to the advertisement, they  are saying to t he 
media that we have  maintained this particular , this, this  environmental condition, and we 
have used this , this, this organic product to produce our material . So, it is  definitely you 
should have it , it is a very sellable product . That is  how they advert ise. This is why it is called 
first party labelling  scheme.  
It is kind of they are  labelling  their own product, we call them self-declaration . You can do it 
up to a certain standard , up to certain structural limit,  threshold limit do you can do it . 
Provide d time to time , the r egulatory bo dy will check it or they may check it suddenly in a 
certain inspection way. If they will not adhere to this kind of , they just simply mislead the 
people they can cause , it can cause a huge harm , their industry can be closed  and their 
property c an be like t aken away by the government . So, in general, you have to , there are certain limits up to which like the company can do this 
kind of self-declaration , but they have to be very cautious about this kind of activities like 
whet her they are actually  doing it or  not. What is second party labelling  scheme ? It is 
established by the Industrial Association  for their member product.  
So, it is like we have this different society or the association in our , suppose, there are 
different bu ildings, like differe nt apartment s, they make a combined association, they have 
this association and they have this specific type of rules and regulatory information that they 
adhere to these , these , these principles . 
So, each and every stakeholder in this  particular case, who  are the sta keholder, all the 
residents of this apartments, they have to abide by these rules , they have to maintain these 
rules, and kind of everyone knows that everyone is maintaining that rules so definitely  the 
product is much bett er, means they  are adhering to this rule , definitely the society looks like 
much cleaner because everyone should adhere to the rules or the regulations given by this 
associations , something like that . 
It is also something like there are like association of  different industries , they have this 
certified, they have these rules . So, all the members of this association , all these industries 
has to abide by all these rules and regulations then only they will be certified by this kind of 
labelling , this is called  second party labelli ng scheme . 
The certification criteria are elaborated by the members and sometimes based upon the 
external expertise from environmental organization on the organization or academia say like, 
in Indian case even different the professors and the experts from different In stitute of 
Eminence they actually involve in it , different CSR labs , different NITs, IITs, their professors 
and lecturers and experts they actually work on it and sometimes they are actually requested 
by these kind of regul atory bodies to come and check wh ether these second party labelling  
schemes that they have mentioned is actually appropriate or not . (Refer Slide Time: 11:07)  
 
Internal certification procedures are like kind of perform ed within the industry and by 
employ ing external certifyi ng companies  are used for verifying the compliance in case of 
second party labelling  scheme. What happened in case of third -party  labelling  schemes, in 
case of third -party  labelling  schemes, it is usually established by an independent public or 
private ini tiator witho ut any influence of the producer s, seller or the distributor of the label 
product.  
So, in Indian context, remember, I give you one example central pollution control board, 
maybe they will be considered as third -party labell ing schemes in this c ase, or say like 
FSSAI , this FSSAI, they are like kind of  the regulatory body , they will say like this food is 
good this food is not they will label it . So, now they have labeled it, so that means this 
product must be good and must be at least thoroughly c hecked.  
I am just giving you examples , do not like it is not has to be this particular regulatory bodies 
only, I am  just giving you certain examples, which can be useful in this particular case for 
you to understand this material . Certified supplied produc ts are then labeled with information 
to inform the consumer that the product was developed in an environmentally friendly way or 
sustainable way . 
The seal is typically licensed to a particular producer or may appear on or accompany wit h a 
product derived f rom a certif ied producer or fishery industries. The producers are customarily expected to track the chain of custody of their products to ensure that the products derived 
from the certified fishery are the correctly labeled on es. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:54)  
 
So, to more to know it like in a much better way. See how this schematic works,  schematic of 
this eco-labelling  process works. First you have a standard for sustainable seafood . You 
developed the standard , first your develop ment of the standard is done b y the experts,  then 
you check the standard,  then you finalize the standard for sustainable seafood, then you do 
this consultation with the stakeholders , all the stakeholders . 
After the consultation is done you finalize that st andard . Once the standard is f inalized, you 
verify your product against the standard with the stakeholder itself . So, once the verification 
is done, you say , okay  it complies, you give the  award of ecolabel . So, with time you can 
keep on checking this comp liance level and keep on revie wing it .  
After reviewing is done you can go ahead with the independent or accredited consultant , they 
can again verification can be done against the standard and this is kind of  circular way like 
you can do it monthly or year ly, even day basis , even like hourly basis a s well based on the 
product that you  are using. So, this is how it is done.  
And then after the ecolabel  is awarded, then it goes to this chain of custody . What is chain of 
custody means ? From the producer to the consumer at each level all the  ingredients t hat is 
added to the system has to be eco-labeled that has to be performed that has to be make sure 
that all the other ingredients that come in contact with the system before it reaches the consumer are actually p roperly eco-labeled . So, that is why it is called the chain of custody . 
So, where this eco-labelling  process is being done.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:40)  
 
There are different seafood related eco-labelling  schemes for wild capture fisheries. There are 
famous t his MSC , you have to go for th is Marine Stew ardship Council and which involves all 
the species . Friend of the sea , KRAV,  I can go for this Naturland , these are very much 
famous for worldwide and for  all the geographic range . 
For like Australian region they  have this Australian Southern  Rock Lobster Clean Green 
Program they have there are some of the programs in Pacific Ocean like Earth  Island 
Institute , so this EII they actually specifically cover the tuna-based  culture species . The same 
way a National Mari ne Fisheries Service in USA th ey also specif ically give you the eco -
labelling  stamp or the certification once  only for the species like tuna . (Refer Slide Time: 15:37)  
 
There are more others like in USA there is another called Pacific Rivers Cou ncil. So,  they 
give you certification f or the Salmon species . You can go ahead in the different other 
countries like New Zealand they have this Royal Forest and Bird Protection  Society , they 
have this Sealord.  In UK they have this Seafish Responsible Fishing Scheme  and which is 
responsible for all the specie s involved.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:04)  
 
There are different seafood related eco-labelling  schemes as well in aquaculture . We have 
Alter T rade in Japan which is specifically for Shrimp.  In UK there are less Freedo m Foods . 
This Tartan Quality M ark in Scotlan d. Thai Quality Shrimp  in Thailand . In Bangladesh we have Shrimp  seal of quality so which is specifically for Penaeid Shrimp  and the 
Macrobrachium  rosenbergii and all . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:30)  
 
So, there are other s like , there are some more  famous ones th e worldwide one is  GLOBAL 
GAAP , ISO 14001 or environmental management systems. If you come to this or come to 
Switzer land, Sweden, these European countries they have this Bio-Suisse,  this KRAV, Debi o, 
which is the Scandinavian countries like  Norway it is famous.  
If you go to aquaculture Stewardship Council it is famous for all the bivalves,  cobia , 
freshwater trout , pangasius, salmon, and etcetera.  In European Union, European Union 
organic is famous for giving the certification for the organi c products.  (Refer Slide Time: 1 7:11)  
 
So, all these examples that I have given are once they got this kind of labelling , they get this 
kind of stamps . So, if you have this Bio-Suisse,  you have seen the stamp fo r the Bio-Suisse . 
So, once you identify any  of this stamp in your product, t hat means they are certified by this 
kind of this institution who has the authority to certify the product .  
And once it is certified, then you can say you can , kind of you can be sure about the 
sustainability or like econo mic benignness of the product that  you have purchased . So, these 
are the difference signs or like ecolabels  that is used for fish and fisheries in general . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:58)  
 So, it also comes w ith the different FAO guidelines on eco-labelling . So, you know FAO,  the 
International Food and Agriculture Organization, I think which is one of the major body 
under the United Nations council. So, this United Nations this in 1982, they have signed one 
convention , they have signed one all the countries , majority of the countries they have s igned 
in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea L OSC and also the Fish Stocks 
Agreement the FAO  code of conduct for responsible fisheries in 1995 was done . 
So, based on the World Trade Organization's rules, al l these rules and all these differ ent laws 
and agreements are responsible for providing the proper protocol of guidelines for eco-
labelling  for aquaculture industries . It can be fish processing industry,  it can be fish 
production industry, I mean like it c an be any kind of aquaculture , any type of , any branches 
of aquaculture, it can be capture fisheries , culture fisheries, it can be this processing 
industries.  
So, all these things are actually involved h ere. Anything related to the aquatic species here. 
So, the schemes should recognize all the sovereign rights of the states and also comply with 
all the relevant laws and regulations in according to the  FAOs guidelines . It should be market 
driven and  voluntar ily nature , it should not be something very much co nstrained thingy which 
will definitel y lose its ability to reach to the market . 
You have to be a little bit okay or you will lose your rules sometimes based on the market 
demand  and all,  so it hap pens with different  situation it happens that in some countr y, they 
are maintaining very strict rules and the other country they are somehow loosen the rules a 
little bit just to reach to the market because otherwise the market will not get the enough 
supp ly with  its demand because of what , because of some specific  number of population or it 
depends on the dif ferent environmental factor  and all  those things . 
So, it has to be voluntary in nature, but not so much , too much . It should be transparent and 
involv e balanced and the fair participation by all the interested parties, it should be 
nondiscriminatory  and no t create any unnecessary obstacles to trade and encourage fair trade 
and the competition . So, that we have to make , that people have to make sure . 
Whoever the party who is doing this eco-labelling  thing y has to  make sure it is fairly done 
and there is no d iscriminations between different in a system and it should provide the 
necessary opportunity to enter the international market.  (Refer Slide Time : 20:48)  
 
It also have to establish a clear accountability betwe en the owners of the schemes and the 
certific ation body in conformity with the international standards . It should include the reliable 
and independent auditing and the verification measures, you cannot just go ahead and do 
something or sign  something which  just because you have the authority to do th at because it 
will be audited, it will be properly verified with time to time by any third party . 
So, once they will do that, they will find out t here is some discrepancies it will definitely 
affect the regulato ry bodies whoever have done it . So, in genera l, so that is how it is to be 
done that is wh y the standard guideline says it has to be properly audited time to time and 
verified time to time . You have to be considered equivalent with other available schemes if 
they follow these guidelines.  
It should be  based on the best scientific evidence available and must also take in  to account 
the traditional knowledge of the resource provided , so that it c an be objectively verified . Just 
because you come out with like v ery advanced  scientific evidence you just can not simply 
deny all the basic existing conventional fa ct and you start labelling  it based on the very 
straightforward and new based scientific evi dence, because people should be educated with 
the fact with evide nces first. 
Once they will know the fact , once they  will be understanding the reason behind it, then they 
will start following those guidelines. So, it has to be , you have to give some basic 
acclimatization period for them to understand this system underst and the guidelines and understand this new scientif ic evidence and then only you remodify your protocol and 
provide  it to with them . 
And then only you should give them some time and after the n you start taking it very strictly . 
It has to be viable, practic al and definitely verifiable . It should ensure the seals  or labels 
convey the truthful information . It should not convey the wrong information . It should not 
convey something misleading, whic h will cause because it is for human consumption. 
Definitely you do not want people to die out there . 
So, definitely it h as to be , you have to be extra cautious . People who are dealing with this, it 
is like very much , has to be very much extra cautious before providing any eco-labelling  to 
any particular product . It sho uld provide the clarity and based on the minimum essenti al 
requirements procedures and the criteria outlined in these guidelines . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:29)  
 
What are the concerns with this eco-labelling  though ? The major problem with this kind of 
eco-labelling is like a trade barrier. Suppose, we have a very s trict economic , how to say , 
environmental concern in a particular country, whereas in the other country, they do  not even 
bother about it, Now, suppose you need your particular product from the countr y who does  
not bother about this economic concern , this particular environmental concern, but because 
you have to abide by the rules that is given by this eco-labelling  organization, I mean, like 
there  is regulatory bodies, you cannot just buy stuff from t hem.  And if you cannot buy stuff from them, it will lose , you have a limitation of the crop or say 
like particular products that I am  talking about. So, this particular crop, because we have a 
very less in  amount, we have to export it from , you have to imp ort it from somewhere, but 
you cannot import it because the other country is not adhering to the law , adhering to that 
particular environmental law, environmental, that sustainability issues . 
Because of that, it can cause different kinds of trade barriers.  There are other reasons as well, 
which can cause the tr ade barriers so I am just giving you one example just for you to have  an 
idea, have an idea like, how it works. The doubts regarding th e scientific bias basis of the 
certification criteria and the sta ndards because for some country for them …  
Say, just to give you an example , for some country  suppose the amount of some particular 
metallic element present in the body of this fish is say li ke certain 1 nanograms nanogram per 
kg of dry weight , in another country it is like say 5 nanograms per kg of dry weight.  The 
however because of this different scientific basis of the certification criteria .  
Because the food that they are getting , the fis h that they  are getting it anyway has the 
presence of , it is comi ng from a place where there is a high chance of this kin d of particularly 
elemental deposition. So, that is  why the country they are kind of pressurized to go ahead 
with the 5 nanogram per kg  of this kind of criteria, which has higher amount of that unwant ed 
element.  
But however, they are kind of pushed to go a head with this because for them you cannot just 
rule it  to the 1 nanogram per kg, because in that case, you cannot have any fish from t hat 
region at all. So, because of this basis of certification cri teria, sometimes they create some 
doubt and they create the barrier in the export and import businesses. Sometimes it is difficult 
to participate in such schemes for small scale producers, be cause they cannot adhere to this 
sustainability issues.  
Because s ome for them, it is a lot of money that they need to inv est and for that they need 
high amount of like the support from the government , support from the policymakers. 
Otherwise, it is very di fficult for them to go ahead with adhering to these different law s and 
different regulations given by these eco-labeling  authorities . Chances of confusion among the 
consumers and traders due to the diversity of ecolabels  and different country it has differ ent 
kinds of ecolabels . So, people also does  not have much of an idea about what is this ecolabel,  what we should , 
befor e having any food or any product from outside country or even inside the country what 
type of labelling  that you should check. People do  not know , people are not concerned about 
it. So, they have to be  educated first about all these things.  
Other  issues lik e certification cost, management support, paucity of data, and also unit of  
certification and the impact on trade . So, these are all th e issues that it has with this eco-
labelling  things , so that we n eed to think about . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:13)  
 
So, in conclusion, I would say this eco-labelling , it is the method that we already discussed, it 
is a method of environmental performance cert ification and that is done all over the world 
pretty much and dep ending upon the type of species it depends what type of which 
organization we  will keep to the what kind of eco-labelling  for promoting the sustainable 
management of these fisheries and aquac ulture or not . 
And it sometimes be self-declaration  also, when it  will be like first party  eco-labelling  
schemes, we call  it you, I think you remember . And in case of second party and the third 
party is like second party is like the management of whole  societal thing y like the member of 
any association . And in case of t hird party, it will be a particular governing body or pa rticular 
organization like in Indian case, central pollution control board also . (Refer Slide Time: 28:12)  
 
So, different ecolabels  are like kind of  approved seals  given to the product, as a takeawa y, we 
should understand, we should realize these facts , and this has certain rules and regulations, 
which are certified by which are already governed by the International Food and Agriculture  
Organization. And this first party , second party and the third -party labelling  are some 
categories which are introduced by Food and Agriculture Organization.  
And based on the governing body from which they are getting this eco-labelling  to, and we 
should realize that it is very important for us, and one of the major th ing that we need to do at 
the very first stage  is like w e need to start educating people about different eco-labelling  then 
only they will understand like, what kind of food or what kind of f ood product or byproduct 
they should have before even consuming , they should, they can easily check the eco-labelling  
and they can check in the network or something from the in the bottles surface itself , in the 
seal itself, that this is ecolabel  by these things . 
So, that means they have adhered to the rules and regulat ions given by the regulatory bodies, 
and so that you can  easily consume it for the betterment of your health , for the betterment of 
your sustainability like for when you  are very much if you  are concerned about the 
sustainability  and a ll. (Refer Slide Tim e: 29:33)  
 
So, I hope you understand what is eco-labelling and altogether these are references that you 
can follow. To get more in details about the information that we have discussed. I hope you 
got to know some information about eco-labelling . And this is the end of this particular 
discussion in this module Techno logy of Cleaner Production . So, I hope you  will get to know 
some information about the eco-labelling . I woul d be very much happy to help you out in any 
by means  in future as well . Thank you so m uch. See you in the next lecture.  