Advance  Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Lecture  59 
Mitigation  and Adaptive  Strategies  (contd)  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:33)  
 
Hello  everyone,  welcome  to the 4th lecture  material  of module  12. In this module  environmental  
conservation  of aquaculture  normally  discussed,  we are discussing  and the mitigation  and 
adaptive  strategies  followed  by the previous  lecture  we will be discussed  in details.  My name  is 
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick , I am from  the agricultural  and food engineering  department  
of IIT, Kharagpur.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  00:48)  
 
In this particular  lecture  material  we will be discussing  about  the mitigation  of mitigating  the risk 
of aquatic  animal  disease  due to the climate  change  and also the adaptation  to climatic  changes  
effects  on the how it affects  the aquaculture  and aquaculture  practices.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:03)  
 
So, to start with,  in order  to mitigate  the risk of aquatic  animal  disease due to the climate  change,  
it is always  better  to go ahead  with either  prevention , mitigation  or coping . By prevention,  you 
can reduce  the probability  of risk occurrence  by mitigation,  you can reduce  the impact  that the risk event  might  bring  when  everything  else has failed  and copying  the reducing  the impact  after 
the risk event  has occurred  once .  
So, these  are the technologies  that we normally  these  are the terms  that we normally  follow  when  
we discuss  about  the any mitigation  strategies . First is the prevention,  mitigation  and coping , 
these  are the technology  it is not only for aquaculture,  but any other  strategic  development  are 
concerned  with this very much  involved  with these  three  different  parameters .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  02:00)  
 
To in order  to start with, like in this particular  lecture  material,  I have  discussed  in tabular  form  
examples  of different  mitigating,  preventing  and the coping  strategies  and how these  strategies  
can be practiced  in a for the betterment  of your aquaculture  produces .  
So, here in this table,  the examples  of generic  biosecurity  risk management  measures  are given,  
like say, risk analysis,  if you do the risk analysis,  it will give you an additional  benefit  of the 
prevention  because  if you are doing  a kind of a prevention  it is a prevention  strategy.   
If you do the good  husbandry  related  practices  like the healthy  stock,  proper  stocking  density,  so, 
it will give you high water  quality  good  nutrition  etcetera . It can help you with the prevention  
mitigation  and the copying  as well.   Good  biosecurity  practices  like, when  your species  it is what  type of pathogens  are actually  it can 
affected  with what  it says is facility  disinfection,  the facility  sanitation,  the proper  biosecurity  
maintenance  and the health  monitoring  and testin g of the all individual  workers  and as well as 
the species  are very much  important.   
Movement  stressing  is very important  movement  stressing  by this way,  you can definitely  
prevent  mitigate  and it comes  under  this all this strategic  environment . You can do the record  
keeping  like production,  water  quality,  stock  move ment,  feeding  health  and the climatic  records,  
it will these  are the information  this is the best practices  that has to be followed  in aquaculture  
farm.  
So, if you follow  this practices,  it will give you this, if you see this tick marks  are actually  
showing  the strategy  which  are considered  under  these  particular  categories  and prevention,  
mitigation  and the coping.   
Border  controls , like the pre border , border  or the post borde r controls  like the pathogenic  risk 
analysis,  health  certification,  quarantine  if these  are the factors  that will help you preventing  the 
spread  of the disease  or the spread  of the any organism  aquatic  organism  disease  risk, 
surveillance  and surveillance  and joining  is possible  for mitigation  and copying  as well.  Control  
of people  unauthorized  entry  visitors  and also the risk communication  is very important  to reduce  
these  different  factors .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  04:29)  
 
Examples  of this this generic  risk management  practic es to prevent  mitigate  and cope with 
aquatic  organic  disease  risk, just like previous . The first is emergency  preparedness  is very 
important  like, early  warning.  It will help you to prevent  and mitigate  the, it is mitigating  
strategy,  it will it will help with that because  once  you have  early  warning  or and also early  
detection  system  you can go ahead  with the early  response .  
Once you can do the early  response,  it will definitely  this all these  categories  will fulfill  the 
demand  of mitigating  strategy  or the demand  of prevention  strategies . Specific  disease  strategy  
manuals  has to be there  which  will help people  to cope  with the event  that we that has already  
happened  and now they can be well prepared , no, it will not repeat  in the next time.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  05:29)  
 
So, after we discuss  about  all the mitigating  strategies  and mitigating  the developments,  that is 
done  in aquaculture,  let us discuss  about  the adaptive  strategies,  what  are the adaptations  that you 
can do in order  to make  maximum  use of the information  that is available  and make  maximum  
use of the science  and the technology  to reduce  the impact  of climate  change  in the aquacul ture 
sector.   
Adaptation,  it mainly  focuses  on the building  the resilience  to the inevitable  consequences , that it 
will anyway  come  with time. You cannot  reduce  it is like scientifically  or statistically  it is not it 
is impossible.  So, in that case,  you have  to go ahead  with the adaptive  strategy.   
What  is adaptive  strategy  first to start with, just suppose  you are going from  desert  area like in a 
very hot climate  to a cold climate,  you will definitely  fall sick, we have  to have  some  adaptations  
timeline , we have  to have  some  acclimatization,  a timeline  period,  that acclimatization  period  or 
that adaptation  period  is required  for your body  to get in cope  with this new situation.  So, that is 
what  we call adaptation.   
So, you have  to adapt  with the new situation  new climatic  condition  and this adaptation  strategies  
are very much  important  when  you know  that some  inhabitable  consequences  are there  and it 
will come  no matter  what  statistically  it is saying  that after a certain  period  of time it will be 
there  it will have  not for sure.  So, in this type of cases,  the adaptation  strategies  are the best to be followed.  It also has the 
capacity  to utilize  the emerging  opportunities  in a more  sustainable  and ethical  fashion.  
According  to the Food  and Agriculture  Organization  2018  the successful  adaptation  
interventions  mainly  focused  on three  target  areas . The first one is the institutions  and the 
management,  livelihood  adaptation,  and resilience  and the risk reduction.   
So, in this way,  you can adapt  to new situation  fast from  the policy  maker’s point  of view, 
second,  your individuality  third is the is like the how to say like the doctor's  point  of view,  just to 
give you an example  to make  it make  you understand  much  better  way. Institute,  the 
policymakers , what  they are doing  livelihood,  what  you are helping,  how you are helping  and 
third,  suppose  you are already  affected  with some thing.  So, what  is the structure  what  is the 
medical  structure  that is available  to help you to get rid of it, this is the adaptation  strategy  that 
you need  to follow.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  08:11)  
 
This is the situation  in world’s  scenario  according  to the Maulu, 2021  this paper  they have  
mentioned  that this map is showing  the adaptive  capacity  of the nations  to change  in any climatic  
situations  on aquaculture.   
If you see the situation  if you see the places  like USA  or Australia  there  New  Zealand,  they are 
in very much  in good  condition  they can they have  some  capacity,  they have  already  developed  the capacity  to adapt to the changes  in the climatic  situation  only for aquaculture  point  of view,  I 
am not talking  in general .  
Cases like, like situations  in India is also almost  in the average,  above  average,  if you go to the 
African  countries,  their situation  is very hard for them  even  the adaptive  capacity  if they follow  
like still it is hard for them  to meet  the goal.  It is very hard for them  to they can someh ow 
manage  the situation  that is going  to happen  in in these  places  very soon.   
Because  the climatic  changes  are very much  visible,  it is happening  and it is actually  affecting  
these  places  like anything , because  most  of all, this is in the almost  in equato r region  and it is it is 
bonding  like anything  with time because  of the this greenhouse  effect.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  09:32)  
 
So, as we discuss  these  different  three  target  areas  to start with the first if you see the 
institution al adaptation,  we have  publi c policies,  the policymakers  can design  a policy  that will 
that has to be followed  by each and every  citizen  of that particular  country  or area.   
Legal  Framework  has to be prepared  institutional  frameworks  and management  and planning  has 
to be done.  Always  remember,  only your idea does not make  any sense  you have  revolutionary  
ideas  but you do not know  how to execute  does not make  any sense.    You have  to know that your ideas  are good,  you have  developed  the frameworks  perfect , but you 
have  to have  a proper  management  team  and proper  planning  and who will execute  that idea,  so, 
this comes  under the institutional  adaptation.   
Then there  comes  the livelihood  adaptation,  like within  the sector  and between  the sector s, then 
comes  the risk reduction  and the manag ement  of resilience  management  for the resilience  like 
risk pooling  or the transfer  early  morning  early  adaptation  risk reduction  and the preparedness  
and the response.  So, all these  approaches  are considered  under  that adaptation  interventions  for 
in fisheries and aquaculture  sectors  to survive  to any kind of any other  efforts  of the climatic  
changes.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:46)  
 
What  are the type of the examples  of this adaptation  tools  or approaches  for capture  fisheries?  
So, we will start discussing  first is capture  fisheries  then I will go to the culture  fisher  and 
aquaculture .  
So, how in the capture  fisheries  when  you go and capture  the fishes  from  the wild stock,  what  
should  be the, what  are the adaptation  tools  and approaches  that you have  to follow  to make  it 
more  sustainable . Like public  policies  like, public  investment,  like research  capacity  building  
sharing  the best practices  and the trials  and the communications  are very important.   These  different  policies  and plans  should  be should  be there  which are actually  very much  
following  the climate  change  adaptation  rules  to address  in to address  the fishery  sector,  it has to 
be when  a policymaker  should  provide  the incentives  for fish product  value  addition  in the 
market  development  it has to be you have to remove  the harmful  incentives  like the example  the 
expansion  of the fishing  capacity  it has to address  the poverty  in the food security  issues  and 
which  systematically  limit  the adaptation  effectiveness .  
So, all these  parameters  has to be addresse d by the policymakers  to go ahead  with this is the 
standard  policies  or institutional  job for in order  to go ahead  with the clima te change  adaptation  
in aqua culture  sector .  
Legal framework,  like flexible  access  to access  right s to fisheries  resources,  in a changing  
climate , Dispute  Settlement  Agreement  has to be there  proper  adaptive  legal  rules  has to be 
followed  or you have  to formulate d regulatory  tool has to be there,  which  will take care of this 
legal  framework,  institutional  framework,  what  is the effective  management  for all the 
stakeholders  like in an Institute  in a particular  company  or industry .  
Awareness  raising  and the capacity  building  to integrate  the climate  change  into research  
management  and the policy  on the roots  enhance  the cooperation  mechanism  including  between  
the countr ies and also inside  the countr ies as well to enhance  the capacity  of fleets  to move  
between  and across  natio nal boundaries  to respond  any change  in species  distribution,  this is in 
terms  of institutional  framework  that is important . (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:12)  
 
In terms  of the, the to continue  with this, like, what  is the institution  goal like management  and 
planning,  as I already  discussed,  all the frameworks  are only done  in pen and paper  ways,  you 
have  to have  a proper management  team  who take care of this, this execution  of this plan.   
Inclusion  of the climate  change  in the management  practices  are very much  important  you have  
to include  the integrated  Coastal  Zone  Management  Systems,  you can improve  the water  
manage ment to sustain  the fishery  services  adjustable  territorial  use right  what  is adjustable  
territorial  use right s is like, as I discussed,  suppose  your country  is suppose  India  and 
Bangladesh , Bangladesh  is sharing  its border  sharing  its border  and their exclusive  economic  
zone  is also divided  in a certain  way.   
So, this exclusive  economic  zone  is the place  where  that particular  country  can go and it can kind 
showcase  its own right  in that in the whatever  the resources  that they can have  from  that water  
body.   
Suppose  in a particular  moment  of time,  your fishing  vessel  would  not be able to find out enough  
fish school  of fish there  and they will they know  that the according  to the satellite  images  and all 
the data they understand  that it is there  in the some  other countries  border.   Suppose,  if you have  a proper  interaction  proper  policy  exchange  between  the these  countries,  
so, what  will happen  we can definitely  go and we can use that territory  for that particular  purpose  
and on behalf  of that you have  to give some other  right  to the other  country  as well, so it is like a 
mutual  understanding  has to be developed.   
Flexible,  seasonal  right  has to be there  temporal  and spatial  planning  to permit  the stock  recovery  
during  any period  of time when  climate  is favorabl e and the transboundary  stock  management  to 
take into account  the changes  in distribution,  this transboundary  stock  management  is the same  
way like the mutual  maintain  this international  policy  thingies  they will it has to be properly  
executed  with the help of the policymakers  discussion  between  the two different  or three  
different  or multiple  countries  in between  multiple  countries.   
Now,  if we start from  the institution  to the livelihood,  what  should  be the factor  what  should  be 
the adaptive  strategies  that people  should  follow  in their livelihood  to go ahead  when  discuss 
about  the capture  fisheries.   
Diversification  of the market  and the fish products  and access  to high value  market  and the 
support  to a diversification  of the citizen’s demand  and preferen ces improvement  in the post 
harvest  techniques.  After  you capture  the fish you have  to take care of the techniques  which  you 
can follow  to harvest  maximum  use of it to utilize  maximum  part of it.  
For that what  do you need  to do in order  to improve  the post harvest  techniques  what  is post 
harvest  technique  after you catch  your fish it has to be done  it has to be chilled,  it has to be 
cooled  down  it has to be cured  for long amount  of for longer  shelf  life then you it has it will go to 
the proces sing industry  it will be chop  down  it will be deboned  or that different  part of it will be 
used for different  other  purposes . Whole  of this structure  this post harvest  technology  has to be 
very well suited  very well developed  to increase  the livelihood  increase  this it will be considered  
under  this adaptation  tools  and approaches  for capture  fisheries .  
The flexibility  has to be there  to enable  the seasonal  migrations , we have  to diversify  the patterns  
of fishing  activities  like with respect  to the species  that you are exploited  location  and the fishing  
grounds  and the geared that is used for enable  the greater  flexibility .  Private  investment  in adapting  the fishing  operations  and private  research  and development  and 
investment  in technologies  are required  adaptation  oriented  microfinance  has to be given  and 
must  be supported  by the individual  basis  not the government  side and government  side they are 
doing  in their best now you have  to make  sure that what  you have  to do what  are the strategy  that 
you can do follow  to reduce the further  considered  as a further  adaptive  tools  for your capture  
fishery  technology  sector.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:26)  
 
Between  the sector  like the livelihood  diversification  like the switching  among  rice farming  Tree, 
crop farming  and fishing  in response to seasonal  and inter annual  variations  in fish availability  
exists  strategies  for fishers  to leave  fishing  that is very important , you have  to have  a proper  
strategy  you cannot  just simply  say no you are not allowed  to do capture  fisheries  from  today 
onwards  what  they will do, they have  to provide  with some  they have  to be provided  with some  
additional  like some  alternate  job or alternate  way of living  their life like some  way the how by 
which  he can he or she can earn some  money  for their living.   
Third and most  important  is the risk reduction  in the management  for the resilience,  you can do 
the risk pooling  on the transport  risk insurance,  personal  savings,  social  protection  and the safety  
nets improve  the financial  security  early  morning  you can have  the extreme  weather  or flow 
forecasting  from  it can be developed  and which  will give you some  excess  time in hand  to be prepared  with the situation  and all that is coming  anyway that is in imminent,  it is coming  for 
sure.  
Early warning  communication  the response  system  has to be developed  monitoring  this climate  
change  trends  like threats  and opportunities  that has to be developed  and the properly  you can 
use the satellite  data and satellite  images  and that can be used for forecasting  this optical  remote 
sensing  or the synthetic  aperture  the data is nowadays  even  used like I am saying  just the 
difference  remote  sensing  data can be used for forecasting  the different  oceanic  events  and any 
water  you like I mean  the water  body  events  and that will help to those capture  fishers  fishermen  
to design  to plan accordingly.   
Other  than that, this risk reduction  and preparedness  and the response  is very much  important  
you have  to proper  discuss  about  the building  proper , better  post for post disaster  recovery  and 
rehab ilitation  system  ecosystem  has to be developed  compensation  has to be there  from  
individual  basis.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:43)  
 
So, from  the last couple  of slides  we were  discussing  about  the all these  adaptation  tools  and 
approaches  for capture  fishe ries, what  will happen  to aquaculture . Now,  let us select  culture  
fisheries , in case of aquaculture  the public  policies,  it is almost  the same  like the design  is the 
same,  because  the only difference  is one is capture  and culture  one culture  one also in the public policies  has to be almost  same  it has to be depending  on like the proper  mainstream  aquaculture  
into the national  and regional  adaptation  and their development  plan has to be there,  it can be 
done  in national  basis  or regional  basis.  
More affecti ng sharing  of an access  of water  and the coastal  space  with other  users  investment  in 
research  and development  of aquaculture  adaptation  technologies  like new species  breeding  for 
species  taller  into the specific  conditions , investment  to facilitate  the movemen t and marketing  of 
farm  product  and the supply  inputs  in between  them  attention  on the attention  of to poverty,  
poverty  and food security  within  the aquaculture  systems,  all these  things  has to be done  in a 
special  scale  of national  international  or region al basis.   
And this framework  will give this I mean,  like this policies  and has to be developed  to which  acts 
as a very basic  tool for this very basic  adaptation  tool for aquaculture  any kind of aquaculture  
practices.   
Legal frameworks,  like property  right s, land tenure  and access  to water  has to be the standards  
and the certification  for production  or for resilient  facilities  has to be the design ed, institutional  
framework,  like strengthening  cross  border,  cross  sector  and the inter institutional  coop eration 
and coordination,  mainstream  adaptation  to food safety  assurance  and control  is it has to be 
there,  it is like very important  from  your industry  industrial  point  of view,  that you are adhering  
to all the national  regulations  and regional  regulation s.  
So, otherwise,  what  will happen,  they will simply  close  your industry  after a while,  it will just a 
matter  of time that they will come  and they will inspect  and they will close  your industry.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  21:53)  
 
Type and the like, in case of manage ment  and planning  point  of view  this climate  change  
mainstream  into this ICZMS  the community  based  adaptation  has to be there,  the integration,  the 
integration  of this climate  changes  in carrying  capacity  considerations,  production  and 
environmental  and social point  of view.   
And in terms  of livelihood,  if we talk about  ourselves  what  will happen  within  the sector,  you 
have  to develop  and promote  new and more  resilient  farming  systems  and technology,  more  
aquaculture  diversification,  integrated  integra te the climate  change  in microfinance,  more  
resilient  strains  has to be introduced,  more  resistance  and the resilient  hatcheries  has to be 
designed  and hatchery  produced  seed has to be has to have  very high resilience  in any climatic  
changes  shift to non carniv orous species  is better  fish meal  and all replacement  is possible .  
All these  things,  which  are even  you can go for integrated  farming  systems  and polycultures  in 
circular  economy  based  systems  design , all these  things  will help you reducing  the clima te 
change  affects  like anything  in aquaculture  point  of view .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  23:08)  
 
Between  a sector  if I talk about  the diversity,  diversify  the liveliho ods is better  very important  
site this is can be as low as the site level  to as high as the interna tional  level . Risk reduction  on 
the management  for resilience  if we talk about  the especially  the risk pooling  and transfer  is 
important  social  safety  here social  protection  is very important  for the people  who are working  in 
that particular  area.   
Early warning , this is very important,  you have  to know  the problems  that you are going  to deal 
with in the very near future  there  and based  on that risk reduction  strategies  has to be developed  
stronger  farming  structures  proper  adaptive  movement  and betwee n the Mari  culture  and the 
inland  aquaculture  techniques,  better  water  management,  practice  water  biosecurity  and the 
frameworks  and has to be developed.   
Preparedness  and Response  is very important,  how prepare  you or how better  you can respond  to 
any unwanted  situations  that may rise if you are not following  the proper  technologies . So, this 
emergency  assistance  to avoid  the additional  damage  or loss of climate  related  disasters  could  
include  the fish feed to avoid  the massive  mortality  of stock.   
So, in gene ral, all these  techniques,  all these  tools  and approaches  that I am discussing,  you have  
to remember  one thing  that it is always  people  say that prevention  is better  than cure,  so 
prevention  is obviously  okay  and in order  to go for prevention,  it is adaptation is one of the major  strategy  by which you can prevent  any kind of wrongdoings  or any kind of say like in a 
disaster  or calamities.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:07)  
 
This is the these  are the discussions  that we have  today  is mainly  I want  you to unders tand how 
these  different  factors  how these  different  strategies  and adaptive  technologies  can be followed  
from institutional  point  of view  to individual  point  of view,  and it can go up to the limit  of like, 
you cannot  just simply  blame  the policymakers  and do nothing .  
It is not only policymakers  they can do even  definitely  their job is the maximum  they can 
develop  some  criteria,  they can formulate  the regulation  laws and regulations,  that has to be 
followed  this laws and regulations  has to be signed  or has to be, well,  it has to be designed  with 
well versed  with the discussion  with the scientist  and the experts  on that field that particular  
field.   
Because  you may think,  because  the problem  with us is like, we are very much  susceptible  to 
changes,  people  do not like changes,  if you want  to have  some  changes,  you have  to it will take 
some  generations  to come  to that stage,  the same  thing  is happening,  we are very much  used to 
inform  your our earlier  generations  and all they are very much  used to exploit  the earth like 
anything  without  thinking  about  the consequences.   Now , we start thinking  about  the consequences  and people  discussing  about  the whatever  the 
consequences  are now,  for the last couple  of decades,  people  are thinking  about  what  should  how 
we can mitigate these  problems,  how we can go ahead  and kind of reverse  this situation.  
People , there  are a lot of discussions  going  on there  a lot of blaming  blame  game  is going  on. But 
actually,  if you are not taking your footstep  at this moment  right  now,  whate ver you are sitting  
there,  otherwise,  you will face the consequences  from  for sure and there  will be a point  which  we 
will be called  the point  of no return .  
No matter  how better  you go ahead  with the adaptation  strategies,  mitigation  strategies,  all the 
retrof itting  of the new instrument  new technology  with the old obsolete d like the notorious  ones,  
but still, you cannot  revise  it, we reviv e it back  to its earlier  situations,  that point  we call the 
point  of no return.   
This point  of no return  is based  on different criteria  like you can based  on the climatic  situation  
based  on the carbon  dioxide,  presence  of the carbon  dioxide  load in the atmosphere  based  on the 
presence  of different  other  obnoxious  gaseous  present  in the atmosphere.  So, this point  of no 
return will come  for sure and before  that, we need  to work  on it to, to delay  it as much  as 
possible  for our future  generations  to survive  better .  
In aquaculture  it is very important  because  we, as we discussed,  we cannot  just survive  without  
having  food.  And the future  food is definitely  this, this aqua culture  and the aqua culture  that will 
definitely  serve  the larger  scale  of humanity  in a very recent  scale  of operations  if I talk about . 
Therefore,  the adaptation  has to be focused  to build  a resilience  to the inevitable  consequences  
that we may face and develop  the capacity  to utilize  the emerging  opportunities  in a sustainable  
in an ethical  fashion.  That is what  we discussed  today.  And that is the very nice conclusion  that I 
can make  out of the discussions  that I have  in this particular  lecture  material.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  28:43)  
 
What  are the takeaways  from  this lecture,  the risk of infection  of aquatic  organisms  due to 
climate  change  can be tackled  in different  ways  of prevention,  mitigation  and coping.  We 
discussed  about  the successful  adaptation  interventions  that can be focused  in three  target  areas,  
institutional  management,  livelihood  adaptation,  and resilience  and risk reduction  strategies.   
We discussed  about  all these  different  target  areas  for capture  fisheries  as well as cultural  
fisheries  I mean,  like the aquaculture  practices  in general . I hope  you understand  this material  
much  a better  way and if you have  any doubt,  definitely  I would  really  ask you to go and go to 
the particular  slide  stop it, pause the video,  read it carefully.   
If you do not understand  Google  it and try to understand  what  is it all abou t, I am telling  you, it 
is very interesting  and you will be very much  at this aquaculture  enthusiast  once  you got to know  
about  all these  factors. It is not only related  to aquaculture  it is environment  it is our own world  
in general .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  29:46)  
 
These  are the references  that you should  follow  to get more  details  about  it and to get more  
information  about  the strategies  and all that we normally  follow  in this kind of sector s. I hope  
you get to know  some  a very truthful  information  for you and you will definitely  behave  the 
same  way and you will definitely  teach  your next generation  or your fellow  members  fellow , so 
or citizens  too with the knowledge  that you have  gained  with this lecture.  Thank  you so much.  
We will discuss  we will continue  this discussion  with this mitigating  strategies  in the coming  
lecture  as well.  Till then,  thank  you so much . 
 
 