Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 52  
Fish and fish products preservation (contd.)  
Hello everyone, welcome to the second lecture of module 11 Aquaculture Industries. My 
name is Professor Gaurav Dhar Bhowmick, I am  from the Department of Agriculture and 
Food Indian Department of IIT Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time:  00:37)  
 
So, it is in cont inuation of the discussion that we had in the last lecture material . So, here we  
will be discussing about the canning, curing, drying and the smoking technique in fish 
preservation or any aquatic species preservation as an aquatic fish processing technolog y. (Refer Slide Time:  00:51)  
 
So, the first method that we  will be discussing is the canning.  This is actually a method by 
which we try to kill the microorganism , or like in order to avoid the spoilage by using the 
heat. In general, the canning the spoilage microorganisms like or the  spoilage causing 
microorganisms are eliminated or even their entry is also restricted . 
It involves couple of stages of treatment, first, the pretreatment of fish , second, the 
preparation of can , third , the filling and the closure of can , fourth is heating or exhausting and 
fifth is the sterilization which is one of the major -part, sterilization part  where to kill the 
microorganisms.  
So, so metimes we go for pasteurization techniques also . Anyway so this is the technique by 
which we can kill the microorganisms or spores  forming microorganisms . Then cooling , 
cleaning , and proper storage. This technique mainly considers the killing or elimination of 
Clostridium botulinum, which is found in the protein rich foods at pH 6 to 7, it is one of the 
major -reason why we go for this canning technique,  canning procedure . (Refer Slide Time:  02:07)  
 
There are other heat resistant bacteria like Clostridium sporogenes that can be eliminated at a 
temperature of 5 to 6 times more than Clostridium botulinum. S o, it needs the temperature of 
around 120 degrees Celsius for 4 minutes or 11 5 degrees Celsius for 10 minutes. It depends 
upon different literature different procedure anyway. So, this canning it actually involves 
different sub categories . 
What are the categories or what are the process that it involves? First is filling . What we are 
going to do , we take a clean empty can we have to clean it properly first , in order to clean it 
you have different procedures of cleaning . Then after the cleaning is done you have to pack 
your product manually or mechanically.  
And just to make sure tha t there is no air pocket that cannot be removed by exhausting , 
exhausting is the process by which you can take get rid of the air pocket present in the top of 
it, but if it is present in between, so, it is very hard for you to go ahead with the exhausting 
procedure, exhausting is another procedure I  will discuss about it in coming slides. So, first is 
filling, you f ill it completely in a proper staggered manner or proper stack manner depending 
on the type of the product that you  are actually filling.  
After then you have to make sure that there is no air pocket in between, perfect. Next is you 
have to avoid too much of a tight packaging , you have to lift some headspace , some air space 
has to be l eft or headspace has to , which we call it has to be left to acco mmodate the gaseous 
liberated while processing or to prevent the can deformation. Third is the fatty fish can be canned with salt while non-fatty fish can be canned with the additives and the texture  
improvers.  
Brine enhances the flavor of the fish that al so you can use . And monosodium glutamate or 
MSG 1.6 ppm and vegetable oils or olive oils are other ingredients that can be used to fill that 
can. Sometimes we try to not to use this MS Gs because of some industry considerations in 
the food industry. But anyway,  so these are the some of the ingredients that can be used to fill 
the can , that is the first phase . 
(Refer Slide Time:  04:38)  
 
Second is called exhausting. What is exhausting? It is the process by which we can remove 
the gas or the air that is present in the can before sealing , before the final sealing, you seal the 
can. T his exhausting it minimize the strain on the can through the expansion of the air 
through heating. It removes the oxygen which is essential to avoid any cor rosion creating 
vacuum upon cooling.  
So, that is why you need to make sure that there is no oxygen present in your system , this in  
your can anymore. So, we can remove it by exhausting process . And also , it can check the 
growth of the microorganism up to a certain level because of the unavailability of their 
favorable condition.  
The third is the sealing, how you seal it, you have to provide it with a proper airtight seal, 
which can cover the top and also the body of the container so that any spoilage causing  microorganisms cannot enter through the process while stay from outside after sterilization  or 
the processing is done.  
(Refer Slide Time:  05:46)  
 
Now , the processing , how you  are going to process it . Complete air removal is possible in 
stream processing first of all, the container with the contents inside is heated in a retort at  a 
temperature sufficient enough to kill the potential spoilage causing microorganisms . The 
vegetative microorganisms like 80 degrees Celsius for 30-minute,  spore formers 100 and 30 
degree for 30 minutes and destroy ing spores you have to go for sterilization process which is 
121 degrees Celsius for 3 minutes . 
Pressure processing could be either be steam or water . The time and the temperature of this 
processing it can vary depending  upon the type of the pack , size of the can , etcetera . By 
adapting this , all this any one of these heating procedures the majority of the spoiling agent or 
the microorganisms which are responsible for this kind of spoilage activity can be eliminated . 
Rapid cooling just after that you can go ahead with the rapid cooling with 36 to 42 degrees 
Celsius after using 5 ppm chlorinated water . 
These are all the very standard procedures . There are a lot of in-depth  analysis it involves . 
Definitely because of the shor t amount of time I cannot go and discuss in details but 
definitely you can find these things in the literature's and if you are interested to know more 
about how this packaging is done , the canning and packaging are done . (Refer Slide Time:  07:10)  
 
So, n ext procedure that we  are going to learn is called the curing procedure . Curing is one of 
the very historic process food processing technique that people used to do it like in the 1000s 
of years back . How it is done ? Even we name with a curing you may even understand that it 
is a process by which the addition of salt , sugar,  nitrites or nitrates, seasonings and 
phosphates and the spices are done to preserve the food which aids in the development of 
characteristic colo rs or flavor to the product . 
Salt actually most widely used ingredient for curing any kind of aquatic products , it creates a 
very low water activity environment for the food so that all the disease -causing  
microorganisms or all the spoiling agents cannot w ork on it because it has a very low water 
activity . And also, it forces  the microbes to face a prolong ed lag phase and eventually enter 
the death phase . What are the different types of salt that we use ? 
Normally , the table salt , sea salt or salt mines from  the earth , etcetera . And the two major 
technique is wet salting and dry salting . Wet salting is where you need to provide less amount 
of salt actually in a salt solution so normally we call them wet salting procedure where salt to 
fish ratio will be 1 is to 4. In case of dry salting the amount of salt that it requires is very high , 
so we call them dry salting procedure. So, these two are the procedures of curing that is very 
famous for 1000s of like from ages.  (Refer Slide Time:  09:01)  
 
So, you may also think about and if you think  like earlier days what used to do your grandma , 
mom like they used to do preserve the food for long when it is preserved in when you 
marinate it with a proper margination  procedure and before that they all the tim e they use salt 
which is one of the major ingredients because it reduces the water activity and it helps to 
increase the shelf life of these kinds of perishable items.  
So, curing what happens it actually affects the protein component , the nature of the pro tein 
component by aggregation and also by denaturation , we call them denaturation of protein is 
happening. The poor control of curing can lead to over or under treatment sometimes which 
in turn can lead to unacceptable product through physical breakage, po or texture or strong 
flavors.  
So, sometimes with the curing if you put the salt in a very high amount or very low amount it 
can cause different kinds of issues which we do  not want in our system so that you have to 
take care of , specially if you do  not want your final processing stuff to be poor in texture or 
very strong in salty flavor . (Refer Slide Time:  10:17)  
 
What is water activity and spoilage ? In general , how curing is affecting this water activity 
and spoilage is discussed . Here, the curing is actually  it relies on the raising in the soluble 
solid content of the fish  product  to a level that the spoilage organisms cannot propagate 
anymore . This is also achieved by removing the water like drying or smoking procedures or 
by diffusion  of the soluble substances into the water by salting procedure by which we can 
reduce the water activity . 
Smoking is also engenders  the bacterio static substances because from the wood  which helps 
to preserve the product and add flavor because sometimes if you realize why we go ahead 
with the grilling , this grilling especially if you can do it with the instinct of say like coal or 
something suppose you  are using wood , just to give you some example in layman's language , 
if you use wood for when you do the smo king in the wood  smoking.  
So, wood has specific type of gaseous substances, which actually reduce the bacteriological 
activities by reducing the spoilage causing microorganisms and also it adds a certain type of 
flavors to your food and because of that the  food is much more tasty , its texture is completely 
different and some people find it very tasty. So, that is  called , this is called the smoking 
procedures and it is very famous in the European region , even in USA it is very famous in 
smoking of food . 
There is a migration of water from the dilute  microbial system to the concentrated sol ute 
system when you provide this kind of curing procedure because of that the microbial cells 
they become dehydrated and which actually cause them to die , sporulate or lie dormant in nature . In the scale of water activity , normally it is like it goes from 1 where effectively  free 
water is available for microbial contamination then to 0. 
Although which means the water activity is very low and because of that there is a  very low 
chance of microbial degradation is there in this kind of, it can be anywhere but if it is less 
than 0.6 only then I  will say you can say that your food can be inhibited by this kind of 
spoilage causing microorganisms. This water activity range ha s to be less than 0.60. 
(Refer Slide Time:  12:59)  
 
Different other curing practices like brining , brining like brine means is like a saltwater you 
can say which actually it is a pretreatment applied before say like smoking . So normally , we 
go ahead with t his brining actually in order to maintain a flavor we put our product in a brine 
solution for a short amount of time.  
Another process is called kench  curing, it is applied to the white fish which then is split open 
and dry salted with the brine allows them to drain off the solution , so because of that there is 
a dry and brittle product you will get which has a very high self-life or long sell price. 
Another is pickl ing, pickling is very standard procedures for Indian context if you know we 
do pickling a lot and also if you go to the polar regions people do the pickling , pickling is a 
standard food preservation techniques , it can store you can do the pickling and it c an store the 
food for a very long period of time.  
It is actually a very strong brine which gives a very stable product . It is suitable for the fatty 
fish when lipid oxidation is limited but can impart a characteristic flavor . And other processes Gaspe cure where it involves a dry salting for 2 to 3 days and the brine formed being retained 
followed by sun drying . This is another process of curing.  
(Refer Slide Time:  14:23)  
 
So, when we go ahead with all these processes, we use different kinds of salts i n general and 
this is a very famous way of doing it. So , what are the types of salt that we normally use ? 
And purity of the salt actually very important because you cannot just simply use any salt and 
unless until it is like manufactured on the food grade one is better not to use it actually 
because see, let me give you one example.  
Suppose you  are using the solar salt, solar salt it is produced by simply evaporation of 
seawater from improvised  lagoons or under the sun and wind . This is the cheapest but  are the 
least pure and salt crystal size is always uniform and it is contaminated with a hefty load of 
foreign materials, which are definitely I  will not advise you to go ahead and have it . Then 
there is there Bri ne-evaporated  salt, which is produced by evapo ration  of the brines from 
deep min es. 
It is less contaminated than solar salt, but still not up to the mark for using it as a brine 
solution in your , I mean like for curing process for your product that you  are going to 
consume . You can go with the rock sa lt, which has a purity level of around 80 to 89  percent  
depending on the source . You can go ahead with this provided that you ensure that the 
minerals that it contains are not harmful in nature.  In case of manufacture d salt which can be produced from any o f the above grade but with  the 
appropriate purification up to 99.9  percentage  then only you should go ahead and have that 
salt and they can use it you can use it for the curing process . 
(Refer Slide Time:  16:13)  
 
Another important processing technique is the drying where we can go ahead with the natural 
drying or the artificial dry ing somehow  to get rid of the moisture content from the fish . So, 
tiny or the lean fish can be sun -dried by spreading on mats  or platforms and or suspended 
condition we normally do it the process of drying , it is very famous in the developing 
countries , it is dried on a mechanical driers,  solar dryer , tunnel dryer or kiln dryer.  
There also you can do it and it is much more advanced and you can have higher production 
rate in a very  short amount of time . The dried cured fish after say like  3 days of curing may 
be stored for a longer duration by subjecting it to the dry . And the key factors that actually 
control to ensure the optimum drying conditions are temperature , relative humidit y, surface 
area, air speed and the volume of fish . 
What do you think like why these are the conditions that makes the more difference ? I am  
giving one simple exam , one simple physical phenomena , suppose you know about diffusion 
process , how you can increase the diffusion process , suppose you have a cup of hot tea how 
you can cool it down it , these are all the processes that are interlinked . So, how you can cool 
it down ? You have to first , what you can do , you can increase the surface are a you can put it in a plate 
instead of having it from the cup , surface area will be increased more area it will get for 
temperature back to the air . So, for it to cooler down temperature definitely  if it is 100 
degrees Celsius and if it is like  50 degrees Celsius, the one which is 50 will definitely takes 
lesser time to get dry . 
The relative humidity , if the temperature , suppose your product has a relative humidity of say 
like 95  percent age and outside air also the relative humidity is like 95  percent age what will 
happen. So, it will take less time. Whereas in case of relative humidity say like in case of air 
that humidity is there 40  percent  is in certain place. So , in which case the drying process will 
be faster ? 
Definitely , where that humidity is 40  percent age rather  than the 95  percent age because the 
difference is much higher there . Airspeed , the more the airspeed , that is why we blow air in a 
hot cup to lower it down the temperature , to lower the temperature, this is the same process 
you just blow the  air the water that is get diffused back to the air will be much higher . 
And also , the volume of the fish which will also , volume and the surface area of the fish , the 
more the surface area the better the diffusion rate. Another driving force for drying is  the 
water vapor pressure difference between the drying air and moist interior of the food because 
that is very important , this vapor pressure difference this is one of the major characteristics 
for the diffusion process.  
(Refer Slide Time:  19:22)  
 Natural air -drying is done in an open air in general using the heat of the sun and the natural 
wind currents that affects  the process . Such a system is at the mercy of the weather and little 
control is possible other than physical protection of the drying  fish. However, this natural 
drying process can be improved by utilizing certain techniques like you can increase the 
surface area available for the moisture loss . 
You can put it in net and you can put it in an elevated ground rather than drying  in a, how to 
say it is like a mat because only one side of its area is exposed . When it will be in your which 
is higher pore size not bigger than the size of your product if you hang it from somewhere 
what will happen it will get both the si de for drying doses , the u pper side  will be sun dried 
and the lower side not only sunlight but not lower si de also be utilized for wind drying 
process . 
Also, t he solar energy that is dissipated back from reaching the ground it will also create the 
enough area for , the higher area will be exposed for drying process . Using the thin cut , you 
can put a small cut , so it will , so the moisture present in the deep inside the body can also get 
air. Faster  if the process of the drying will be much faster in this case . Raisin g the 
temperature of the fish and also orientation of the fish for maximum exposure to sun  and 
wind . 
If you have say like Bhetki  which is like almost like this elliptical shape. So, you do  not put it 
in like this , you will put it like this so that maximum area sunlight will , the heat will be 
effective for its maximum exposed area . Artificial or the mechanical drying will give better 
control and thus give better quality and uniform product . However, it comes with the high 
cost of equipment and operations . (Refer Slide Time:  21:22)  
 
So, what are the other techniques like the smoking . Smoking , the very basic thing about 
smoking I already discussed like there is  another method of fish product preservation, which 
actually combines the preservation value of the  smoke like burning wood, I told you 
remember the burning wood it contains a large number of compounds especially phenolic 
compounds that can kill microorganisms , just remember this is a very important fact that why 
we use this burning wood . 
It has this ph enolic compound , vaporize d phenolic compound like this compound these gases 
are harmful for microorganism . Second thing is the smoke generates the heat which will dry 
the product . And third is cooking , fish flesh is cooked as the temperature generated is v ery 
high and which in turn destroys the enzymes  and kill the bacteria . 
In some cases, this cooking and drying phenomenon  plays a major role in longer storage life 
and the burning of wood or the sawdust it creates a smoke during the incomplete combustion 
and this varies with the sources of fuel or the ventilation of the fire the amount of air that is 
available for the curing procedures . (Refer Slide Time:  22:31)  
 
You can see the dry ing how it is done , in small net at the  elevated ground is there for higher 
rate of sun drying . And so, left  one this is the  smoking is done, see in  the temperature  wood  is 
burned for smoking of your product . 
(Refer Slide Time:  22:51)  
 
Systems like we normally go ahead with the different pre-smoking procedures . First, we do , 
what we do we split the , there are the different prosses,  first we clean the fish then we 
immerse in a clean 70 to 80  percent  brine and hanging and which allows a brine protein and 
glossy skin to form . Then we go for this c old smoking it takes like 30 degrees Celsius without 
the process to allow some drying as well as preservation by the deposition of the smoke  
compounds . A high initial temperature and high airflow promotes case hardening and because of that an 
impermeable outer skin there is like normally gener ates and which prevents the outward 
moisture movement and inverse smoke  component moment also . So, this kind of thi s case 
hardening gives a hard surface covering beneath which this spoilage  can occur in the wet 
tissues . However , in case of hot smoking, this phenomenon  is not , in case of hot smoking it 
happens in 70 to 80  percent  or even at 100 degree Celsius such that the fish is cooked and can 
be eaten without further heating process . 
(Refer Slide Time:  24:04)  
 
So, all these techniques all the preservation techniques that we discussed is used by canning 
by fisheries and aquaculture industries or fish processing industries . Out of them this canning 
as I told you it is one of the , like it is the  second most popular method of processing fish f or 
direct human consumption after freezing. And also curing is all like in all its forms is the 
oldest of the techniques available to preserve the fish . 
Curing it prevents the spoilage of fish products by removing the water. How we can remove 
the water ? By drying process or smoking process or the diffusion of soluble substances into 
the water product like the salting process , we use different kinds of curing agents , salts. That 
can also be done to reduce the spoilage of fishes from this kind of aquaculture -based  
industries.  (Refer Slide Time:  24:54)  
 
So, what are the takeaway messages , like fish preservation, it is one of the methods which 
can increase the self-life of fish and other fish products . It keeps the fish after it has landed in 
the condition in wholesome or fit for human consumption or for any further byproduct 
recovery . There are ancient methods of preserving which still people are using like drying, 
salting, pickling and smoking.  
All these techniques are still used today, but more modern techniques of freezing and canning 
have been on the large importance right now and people are working on it and it is there like 
if you  are interested definitely I would request you to go and study  more about all these 
individual techniques, especially you go for what are  the different freezing techniques, what 
are the different curing techniques that is available nowadays in the high end technical 
industries  like where the fish processing  in done in a very high rate, I mean, like in a large 
scale.  
So, what are the techniques that they use ? You just simply go and google it and you can 
search for different YouTube material , it will definitely help you understand these different 
processes much better w ay. I hope you get to know a lot of information from this last two 
lectures regarding  the fish preservation techniques.   
So, in the coming week, I  will be discussing about different byproducts in coming two weeks, 
I mean, like t wo lecture material, I  will be discussing more about the different byproducts of 
fish and how that can be utilized . There is nothing in the fish that we can throw away . It is not 
only for human consumption and then we can just throw out all the other parts . All the other parts normally when we do it in a manual process in the normal haat or the 
bazaar we go what we do, we only take the flesh and we get rid of all the scales, we get rid of 
all the inner parts , we get rid of a lot of essential portion of the fis h body, actually, I am  
telling you, it is really been possible for the industries,  if you can make a proper industry in 
scientifically  way if you go ahead, you can actually utilize each and every part of fish, 
regarding that I  will be discussing in details  in the coming t wo lecture material . 
(Refer Slide Time:  27:21)  
 
So, these are the references that you can follow to get more knowledge about it. And I hope 
you will get to know some information about these processes if we define fish processing, 
preservat ion techniques. I hope you can understand more much better if you go ahead with 
some other literature review and would  definitely be happy to help you by any means if I can 
to understand it better. Thank you so much. See you in the next lecture.  