Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav  Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food  Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 55 
Zero Waste Recycling  
Hello everyone, welcome to the advanced aquaculture technology course and this is the fifth 
lecture , the last lecture of the module 11 , Aquaculture Industries . This lecture material is all 
about the zero-waste  recycling. Whatever we have discussed in the last 3-4 lecture, I  will be 
giving one brief and I  will also give you s ome additional information on what is zero waste 
recycling. So welcome. My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick, I am from the 
Agriculture and Food Engineering D epartment of IIT Kharagpur.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 0:59)  
  
 The concepts that I  will be covering in this particular lecture material and what is first of all 
to start with , what is zero waste ? Like what are the inputs and outputs of aquaculture and how 
they can somehow be utilized at all the outputs of aquaculture , can further be re -modif ied in 
order to adhere to the zero-waste  concept ? What are the waste of aquaculture ? Fish 
byproducts and zero waste and the systems which use the resources . And we will go ahead 
with the 1-2 case studies where fish waste can be utilized and it converts into the wealth . So, 
we call it fish waste wealth .  
And the fish silage production and all also we  will be discussing details, s o just to give you 
some idea that nothing is waste.  Like you can utilize each and everything of your production 
house, each of your productivity or produce  from your farm , and how to do it ? I have already discussed a little bit about the various byproducts. In here also, I  will be giving you more 
overall idea about how to do that , in your farm . In your industry, in your fish processing 
industry , in your aquaculture  farm,  how you will utilize each and every stage of your waste 
and how it can be utilized as a resou rce for the second stage of it or the other follow up stage 
of it. Perfect.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 2:24) 
  
So, to start with, first, I hope I do  not have to say these things like to you , like you already 
know, from the name itself, what is zero wa ste. Zero Waste is a concept we… like, you 
know,  people started adhering to it like when they started thinking that we are not only you 
know, by ourselves  in this nature , in this world, it is not that we only think about ourselves , 
we have the production for our benefit a nd that is  it and then we throw away all the rest of it 
to the nature .  
Because earlier the population was less , that time nature can somehow self -sustain or self-
proclaim  its originality or they can still , it is possible  to a certain stage the harm that we  were 
doing for long for this pre-industrialization era . But now we crossed that stage, for the last 
100 year we crossed that stage like anything. So, we cannot do the all anthropogenic activity 
that we  are doing right now to the earth without thinking about its en vironmental impact.  
So, to know about… to do something, which does  not have any much of environmental 
impact or even if it is , it does have , actually each and every changes you want to do in the 
nature is does have an environmental impact, but what you ca n do? You can minimize it, you 
can minimize that load in the environment or somehow we try to do it neutral , even negative impact means you somehow try to even help the environment to grow sustainably so that all 
the harm that we have done is somehow be neutralized.  
So, this zero-waste  concept is one of such. T his is one of the promising and attractive ways of 
solving the waste management and  the recycling issues. We have the science and technology , 
we use different scientific and technical knowledge in developing some products and a ll and 
once the product is done, all the rest of the material we throw away . What we can do? W e 
make a proper re gulatory body to maintain this , to have a proper law , proper regulation who 
will say yes? No, you cannot do that, you cannot just throw that wastewater which is coming 
from your ind ustry j ust like that into the surface water body.  
You have to , what you hav e to do? Y ou have to treat it. You have to treat the water. Try to 
see that what are the other stuff tha t you can collect from that waste w ater and just give me 
one example. And then at the end , the water which is actually clean enough that you can 
throw i t in the surface water bodies and which will not cause any environmental harm, then 
only it is possible , then only I will allow you to throw that water to the surface water body.   
If the regulatory bodies are strict enough , if they have proper stringent  laws about it and the 
rules are written about it and all the industries or the farms are actually … must have added 
those laws and all, then what they will do? T hey will generate the actually envi ronmental 
awareness.  
Because of the environmental aware ness this regulatory bodies are doing , all the 
policymakers are doing , this environmental, because of this environmental awareness this 
industry is well , first they think like okay, it is an unnecessary rule  and all , we have to follow 
it, it increases our , it reduces our revenue, the net economic return  and all. However, for the 
long run, it is beneficial for all of us,  
So, then they will start ad hering to these  laws and they will start introducing some techniques 
by which they will reduce their waste imprint o r the waste footprint. B ecause of the lower 
waste footprint , they started utilizing, because they started utilizing actually the y started 
getting more amount of economic benefit because they are utilizing all the byproducts from 
that wastewater or silage  waste product and then they utilize it for different other purposes.  
There was a time you know, I am  not giving you the name of the company that they are 
generating a lot of wast e at certain moment of time in one  city in India. So, what happened? 
This ind ustry , they started generating a lot of waste and all , then the regulatory body says no, you cannot do that . What they do? T hey put some tree, certain trees there and  then you will 
be surprised. A fter 15 to 20 years, the tree , the amount of tree that they have s hown there and 
they are giving them additional amount of economic return because of the food that they are 
getting out of it . 
Those are exported from India right now, because of its high quality and all. So, initially what 
was nuisan ce for them , what  was additional burden to them, it becomes some economic , 
some way of getting some higher economic return. So, that is  how zero waste can be, you 
know, this concept can be promoted to the industries with examples like this, th e zero is not 
always a burden to you, but it can be further beneficial for you to get some extra benefit 
because you know, waste is just a misplaced resource. So, zero waste approach is to inspire 
reshaping the resource supply chain . As a result , the entire product or the byproduct can be 
reused and recycled.  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:56) 
  
 What are the key aspects of zero waste concept is to manage the waste holistically , to 
develop a guidelines  or the policies that address activities of smart planning of products and 
services , the whole product line actually, to communicate and educate the citizens or the 
beneficiaries , to develop a green supply chain and also to focus on material efficiency in raw 
material selection.  
What does that mean? Suppose you  are utilizing certain raw material, which has a very low 
efficiency which is like you know, which you can utilize only 50  percent  of it and the rest 50  
percent  goes just like you  are not using it . Just to give you one small example you know, forget about this or that , the industry thing and all , just simple pure aquaculture  farm. 
Suppose when you have a fish, you  are giving them food , suppose a flake  food or say like 
pellet food, which that fish is n ot utilizing a t all because of certain factor and all .  
Now , you think about it , now you put your brain into it and you started thinking like what can 
be the reason why the fish is only eating 50  percent  of it and 50  percent  goes uneaten? E ither 
you have t o change the feeding design, either you just simply change the food  constituents 
and make it more lucrative , more available or  viable for your fish, they will start eating 70 to 
80 to even 90  percent  of the fish  feed.  
Just by changing the texture , wow  just by changing the nutrient contents and just by changing 
the amount of , you know just some additional constituents  that you can supply which , fish 
very much love it and they will start consuming more and they will convert this into their 
biomass in mor e amount and because of that, feed conversion ratio will  be released and this is 
how we can , this is one of the example of you know you have to focus on metal effic iency in 
raw material selection.  
Also,  to invest in the waste management technology like in  case of aquaculture industries, if I 
talk about , you have to go ahead with the  recycle aqua culture system , you can go ahead with 
the aquaponic systems. So, all these technologies are helpful for helping you to manage the 
waste in a very holistic way. In g eneral , zero waste concept encompasses the waste 
prevention, high recycling level and also valuation  of all reso urces all generated from the 
waste.  So, zero waste , it derives from the perception that waste must be understood as a 
potential resources . (Refer Slide Time: 10:48)  
  
 Just see here . What are the inputs and outputs of aquaculture ? What are the inputs of th e 
aquaculture? You have the water supply , you have fish seeds, you have feed , you have 
fertilizers , other than light , stocking , land, construction materials , etc. then there is your 
aquaculture production . I the end you will get the output . What are the outputs?  The 
harvested fish, the wastewater, the chemical residues, microorganisms , other than the 
greenhouse emissions and all.  
So, out of them, what are the good thing that  you can find out? Y ou know, in a very layman's 
language , the first good thing is the harvested fish.  So, you have harvested the fish , that is  
pretty much good , that you can use, now you do  not have your belly full of  these fishes and 
all. So , it can be used for human consumption . First think about it, what about the wastewater 
that it generates? What about the chemical residues that it generates?  
What about the microorganisms still prevailing there and what about the  greenhouse  emission 
that it does cause ? We have t o think about it . In order to go for more sustainability issues and 
all, when we talk about sustainable production and all , which is very much essential , we have 
to talk about it. So , when we talk about all these things, we have to think about proper 
preparation , proper method or process by which you can deal with these problems as well. 
You can treat the wastewater and to put it back to the aquaculture tank , that is it.  
You are utilizing the resource again and again . Chemical residues , you have to treat it , you 
have to use it, convert it to any biomass and  all, then you can perfectly collec t it and use it for 
some manure and fertilizer production . Microorganism , you have to simply ki ll it, either UV or ozonation or some , some way you have to kill it before you throw it to any other surface 
water body. That is  the thing that we need to do .  
These a re the stuff that we need to do . How we can reduce the you know the emission ? They 
just say that if you can , if you reduce the energy that it requires for aquaculture production, 
that will definitely reduce the energy emission. So, what you can do instead of providing 
complex , like designing in a very awkward way , suppose you have different i n your farm , in 
your nursery pond t o, say like rearing pond or something, so  this all the water circulation, it 
will be better if you can do it all by gravitational method . 
You can think about it by which you can use this gr avitational water all the time s o that you 
will reduce the utilization of the pump in your system , in your farm . So, in general, so when 
you design the hatch ery, you have to think about how  you can reduce the greenhouse 
emission, how can you  reduce the energy application  and all. O r if y ou cannot reduce, go 
ahead with renewable energy, go and simply use the solar energy.  
Solar energy, it reaches a very optimal stage already. So , go ahead and use it and definitely 
you do  not have to worry about you know, not only that solar energy will giv e you some 
energy to neutralize the en ergy demand b ut sometimes it may  also cause some energy surplus 
which you  can even use it for your other than farm activit ies also .  
So that is  what we need to think about. That is  how we need to think , how we can sustainably 
go ahead  with aquaculture  farm production and aquaculture fishing , I mean the fish product 
and byproduct processing and all . So, all these things has to be put has to be there in our 
mind.  (Refer Slide Time: 14:30)  
  
What are the  different waste  that you can have from aquaculture ? In general , it generates 
huge amount of liquid and solid waste . You know it right ? So, in general , one of the major 
liquid waste is the wastewater coming from the fish farming  processes . Other than that,  but 
this fish processing waste and the fish waste after the human  consumption is another serious 
issue but this can also be categorized as liquid waste  and the  solid waste.  
So, the reusing and recycling of this waste and creating valuable products from i t is very 
important from the environmental point of view, is  not it? And also, the technologies  and the 
proces ses, which actually reuse or re -cycle this waste generated by themselves will be the 
only answer to fulfill the Zero W aste objective of any farm o wn. A quaculture systems like 
IMTA, if you remember this multi trophic aquaculture system,  the Aquaponics, recirculatory  
aquaculture systems, etc are a few examples that can reuse the resources and reduce their 
effect on the environment.  
So, if you remember like, I already discussed like, what can be done, how to reduce and reuse 
the processes , reuse the waste ? You go for some high-end technologies, high end 
technologies, but which will reduce your environmental impact and which will also give you 
higher economic benefit, proper waste utilization and  all. (Refer Slide Time: 16:08 ) 
  
If you see the aquaculture solid waste, how in general it has this aquaculture sludge and the 
fish processing waste . In aquaculture sludge , they have this residual feed or the fish pieces 
and all , which i s having a very low total solid,  like 1.5 to 3  percent age but volatile solid or the 
total solids around 50 to like , volatile solid to total solids ratio is around 50 to 92  percent  and 
all. So, this volatile solid means it  is very high . The higher amount of  volatile solid means 
high amount of , what is there? I t has a very huge amount of organic matter or the biomass , 
organic biomass  and all.  
It kills that because remember I told you the  volatile suspended solid is indicati ve of the 
amount of microorganisms present in your system , leaving or like in dead condition, you 
cannot tell it but in general this  volatile suspended solid shows you the amount of 
suspended … the organic  biomass present in your system. An other is like fis h processing 
waste. I t normally  contains the fish tissue -head, skill, viscera, fins, tails, backbones, dead fish 
etc. And also, it has a very high protein and lipid and very highly perishable which contains 
that 20 to 80  percent  of the raw fish weight . 
What you can do with this solid waste ? You can use it for different purposes. Just simply to 
give you one example, you see the aquaculture solid waste if you go ahead with the aerobic 
composite, okay if you go for composite waste culture and all , you put it  in the aquaculture  
sludge with time . What happened ? Because of the aerobic microorganisms which grows 
there, they will convert it to different kinds of compost and which can be utilized  for manu re 
or fertilization purposes  and all.  And it is a very organ ic organic in nature, it will increase the your crop yield and all because 
it has a lot of beneficial nutrients which is very much necessary essential for the plants and  all 
and it will also help you get rid of this nitrous oxide, ammonia, carbon dioxide a nd methane 
and H2O and at the end you will get a proper composting material  and all . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 18:16)  
 
So, what is the significance of fish byproducts in achieving the zero waste? Remember in the 
last lecture, we discussed about all the fish byproducts. I am  repeating it again , these  fish 
byproducts are a major reason how we can achieve the zero waste from the  aquaculture 
industries or like fish processing industries . In general, the byproducts of this fish actually  
represents 30 to 70  percent  of the whole fish even you can imagine up to 70  percent  of the 
whole fish.  
So, you collect a fish, you capture or catch a fish, then suppose you only have a portion that 
you really like  the meat portion, still, you throw away the maximum part of it, it can go up to 
70 percent  of it, which can be a very good source of macro and micronutrients. But what you 
do, you just simply throw it unutilized which ends up as a waste. So , to minimize the food 
loss and the waste from this fish value chain and at the same time to improve the f ish waste 
management strategies , several methods can be used to convert this byproduct into value 
added products.  
We can use it for animal fish ingredients like fish meal or fish oil, if you remember, we can 
use it for biofuel and the biogas production. W e can use it for dietetic products like  chitosan 
and, we can use it for pha rmaceutical products like Omega -3 oil and all, fish leather,  fish silage and fish fertilizers  and all . So, there are just to give you some examples like you know 
by which you can ha ve this waste to wealth transformation.  All these products I have already 
discussed in the last two lecture . If you remember there we discuss ed in detail like what are 
those d ifferent byproducts and what are the use of it .  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:03)  
  
Then other than that, this integrated aquaculture system is also utilized , the output of one 
system as input of another . Suppose the nutrient rich water from the pond is either  it can be 
used a s an irrigation purpose or can b e a feed source for other animal s and the  excreta or the 
crop residues are used as fertilizer for  pond.  
So, they can be interconnected and they can be well utilized for different purposes  and all . 
So, in this manner , the waste generated in the system can be used within the systems or fo r 
productive purpose or it can be intra-systems or inter -systems as well , like you know from 
agriculture , aquaculture when you go for this this kind of culture , when you go for this 
agriculture aquaculture systems in general so, you have this rice field , you have this crop , you 
have this fishe s and all which will help each other to , which will help the symbiotic relation 
to grow and at the end it will help to reduce the waste matter generation and all.  
You go for this , see the effluent in the solid waste h ow we can do in this , how we can get 
biogas out of it ? You simply put it in the in a digester . In a digester what will happen ? There 
will be a mixture and there  will we can even provide it with the oxygen sometimes or if you 
do not want oxygen, like it will be go for the fermentation process and at the end it will go for 
separating the strap , you can get the fermentation liquid or vfa, mainly volatile fatty acid and you can get the soil amendment fertilizers and also the biogas can be generated w hich will 
come into contact with the atmosphere , with the hydrogen , methane , carbon dioxide  and all . 
Now, you say like it is obnoxious  these are all the greenhouses  and all . So, that is  why we can 
utilize it. W e are not just throwing it  right  away to the a tmosphere , you can utilize this biogas . 
If we have enough amount of  digested in your system, you can produce . Definitely , you can 
use it for continuous production of biogas, which can be useful for your normal household 
and all. Y ou can create it , you can easily store it and you can utilize it for the reuse  and all .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:48)  
  
Although these technologies, RA S technology and aquaponics , we have already discussed in 
earlier modules . In RAS you know, we keep on using the same water  which is recycled back 
to the po nd by treating it in the bioreactor and which will and also in the , there will b e like in 
those basic separator,  all the solids separators , all the drum filters or something like that we 
can use to get rid of all the suspen ded matter and the metabolites .  
And at the end the all the organic matter can be consumed and the nitrogenous organic matter 
and all this into pollutant , load can be reduced by using the organic treatment method , I mean 
the biological treatment method. So , at the end whatever the product that we  will be getting it 
is very low in pollutant load . Same way the Aquaponics system , you remember we discussed 
about the aquaponic systems how it was ? The fish  waste product, you are giving it to the 
plant , plant is v ery happy , they are utilizing it .  
Before provide  it to the plant what you can do ? You can little bit change the variant , you can 
provide it in the biofilter . The biofilter, what they will do ? They will convert the ammoniacal  waste coming from the fish tank to  a nitrate waste and all. So , this nitrate is actually  this, 
because of the presence of nitrifying bacteria this  nitrate is helpful for your plant to grow and 
then this plant will be very happy to grow there and they will get that , they will consume  in 
this nutrient and they will grow very fast and at the end they will reduce the pollutant load 
and the water which will be after the treatment , it will be coming to the fish tank again. This 
way you can generate a whole resource efficient cycle which wi ll give you higher economic 
return with  very low environmental impact, w hich will give you the idea that we are talking 
about zero waste .  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:40)  
  
 So I will give you one or two different case studies . I will discuss in this module , so to give 
you some brief idea about how it works , like you know fish waste and how it is actually been 
done. This fish waste in country , densely populated country like India , it is a really something 
to worry about. And normally what we do ? Normally , major of this fish waste is actually 
dumped in the coastline areas . To tackle this problem our Central Institute of Brackish water 
Aquaculture CIB A, we have their head office in Chennai, India.  
So, they teamed up with the local people to turn this waste into wealth . They come up with 
some innovative technology to convert this fish waste into fertilizer products . Like they 
provided the training , the equipment to convert this fish debris into t wo value added 
products - first, the plankton plus that the name which  is used for in aquaculture itself to boost 
the healthy  plankton and the second is Horti plus which is used for organic manu re for 
horticulture. They have shown the 100  percent  utilization with nil wastage .  (Refer Slide Time: 25:57)  
  
So, it is doable , it is doable in real life scenario . If you see this , it is done in India , this 
plankton plus and Hortiplus. W hat they are doing , actually they are utilizing this all this fish 
waste that is collected from the market and all this , they have this these silo s with this blade 
and all , they cut it in a small piece  which makes this black slurry and then they add some 
enzymatic , specific enzymatic solution .  
This enzymatic solution because of that, after a couple of days of fermentation, it will convert 
and then they will use the centrifuge  and all, at the end they will get the very  slurry part of it 
which is used for growth , which is called as a plankton plus and which is used for he althy 
growth of the planktons in the aquaculture and by means of that you can reduce the fish feed 
requirement because if the  plankton growth is very high the fish can get enough amount of 
plankton to have.  
So, this way you can use the fish feed requirement and Hortiplus, at the end of whatever the 
solution is that you  are getting  and whatever the , I mean like the solid part , the slurry part that 
you are getting , that you can dry it and at the end you will get the p owder which can be used 
as manure  which is a very high nutrient based manual that you can utilize in your hort iculture 
purpose or like agriculture  purpose . Just to give you one example, like 50 kg of fish waste 
can be used for generation of almost 40 kg of plankton plus and almost 1 kg of this Hortiplus 
and all.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:44)    
So, this Hortiplus is manure  and also this  plankton plus, th is liquid that  it generates and 
because of its reusable in nature, it can lead to as  in very proper even 100 percent waste 
utilization  is possible. So, it is done , it is done by various countries and India also shown i t 
like how it is to be done. And I would really request whoever is working on aquaculture -
based  industries and all , they try to think about how they can go ahead w ith this zero-waste  
concept. F ish silage is a nutrient dense product ideal for feed purposes  and all a nd also for 
eventual use as a fertilizer .  
This fish silage  is a liquid product produced from the whole fish or some part of it. In general, 
we do this , we add  it with the lactic acid producing bacteria or the acid producing bacteria for 
the hydro lysis of the mass through the action of natural proteolytic enzymes from the fish. In 
this process, the fish waste which is converted into a liquid mix of hydrolyzed protein lipid 
and minerals is then , it can be easily digestible when absorbed by the terre strial or  the aquatic 
animals.  
So, just  slight application , slight additional inoculation can help it to convert it to a very rich 
nutrient for your aquatics application , aquatic animals , feed for your  aquatic animal plus for 
your terrestrial animal as well. So, just imagine , just this small step can convert any of your  
the wastage, the fish waste into a very high nutrient rich fish silage  and all . (Refer Slide Time: 29:18)  
  
Because in general, if we  do not use it, it sim ply cause very serious concern to the 
environment and also it is a useful product , at the end it becomes a useful product which will 
reduce this kind of waste. So, what we do ? We normally process . After th e processing is 
done, w e segregate all the waste which is like not possible for us to use it anymore. Grind it, 
stir it at the acid, store it for a couple of days. That is  it, you have your food ready.  
Use it as a supplement or as a fertilizer to your pon d, you can use it for , mix it with other 
food to your  animal or the livestock’s  and all. I t will definitely have , because of its  rich 
nutrient content, it will give very high growth boost er, or it can use as a gr owth booster for 
your rear ing fishes as well.  
(Refer Slide Time: 30 :09) 
  So that is how these are the all different, you know, the places where you can use this kind of 
aquatic byproducts  and all . The concept, the idea of these zero wastes  is a great way towards 
achieving sustainability as we discussed in this lecture. And sustainability is not just being 
able to grow things, but it is growing without harming the environment, which matter s or 
matters in a very long run . So that is  what we u nderstood from this lecture.  
We have to use the waste, we produce from things and utilize it in some other way  just as 
Mother Nature does that all the time.  We have to mimic the natural system. That is  the best 
way. They are the best architecture . They are  the best engineer, I would say, the mother 
nature . We have to mimic the systems to do stuff sustainably, that is  the best way . That is  
why synthetic biology is growing so much nowadays and people are really working on 
developing ideas, even engineering developments are happening , mimicking the natural 
system and all.  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:22)  
  
Because those are so preci se, so scientif ically accurate  that we need to follow them in order 
to grow something really looked at and really sustainable in nature , which should be 
sustainable  in nature . So as a takeaway message, I w ould say like, you know, the waste  to 
wealth program , it is not on ly help to benefit the local people, but also it clean up the local 
environment and boost the aquaculture efforts of your country.  
Zero Waste concentrate , it leads to the prevention of waste, recycling of waste and utilization 
of waste to generate useful products and high economic benefits. Other than that, this old 
concept also considered the waste as a valuable resource rather than problem which is something  we really need to think about.  We simply use the product that we like and all the 
other things associated with it, which is not okay for you at that particular moment, you just 
simply throw it and it creates a huge amount of solid waste and the liquid was te.  
Especially if you talk about the solid waste you see the landfills in the  municipal areas  and 
all, amount of everything it , I am  talking about here the  aquaculture concept and all the 
aquaculture at geo  waste concept, but think about all the other iss ues that we are having 
where we use this , we conceptualized  this zero waste and we generate a huge amount of 
waste rather than and then at the end, it ends up spoiling our own bodies. Because those 
waste at the end it comes to our bodies  itself by bio comp etition, by various processes.  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:58)  
  
Think about it and I hope like these are the references also you can you can follow to get 
more idea about it. And I hope you get to know about the Zero Waste concept as a whole , not 
only for aquaculture purpose, but all the other purposes , all the other industry application and 
all that whenever you try to find out the solution for one problem do  not create other. So, try 
to find out how the waste that you are generating can furt her be utilized.  
Maybe it is not good for you, but maybe it is good for someone else. Let them come and 
make a group effort and try to find out the solution and use the waste in a sustainable manner  
so to generate a proper sustainable society.  So, thank y ou so much. I hope yo u got to know 
some important fac ts from this lecture. I will come back in the coming module. Thank you so 
much.  
 