Advanced Aquaculture Technology  
Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture 54   
Fish by -products (Contd.)  
Hello everyone. Welcome to the fourth lecture of module 11 Agricultural Products and 
Industries where I will be discussing about the fish -byproducts in the continuation of the 
earlier lecture. My name is Professor Gourav Dhar Bhowmick, I am from the Agricu ltural 
Community and Department of IIT, Kharagpur.  
(Refer Slide Time:  00:41)  
 
The concepts that I will be covering in this particular lecture are the important things -
byproducts  like the Fish Gelatin , Roe  and the Caviar, F ish Maws  the Isinglass  and the Pearl 
Essence .  (Refer Slide Time:  00:57)  
 
So, to start with, you remember when we start discussing about this fish -byproducts in the 
earlier lecture, we mainly focusing on the stuff that we can actually use from the fish 
processing industries or aquaculture products which I know which we normally do not  use it, 
which we normally throw it away and all.  
But however,  if we can scientifically properly , we have proper scientific equipment’s  and a ll 
scientific process we follow. W e can easily use those products the waste products and we can 
make very us eful stuff out of it . Very useful products out of it and which can be further be 
beneficial for aquaculture or pharmaceutical or personal care products and different uses for 
different  industrial uses as well .  
So, one of them one of these waste products t hat can be utilized as a fish -byproduct is this 
gelatin . It is an incomplete protein extracted from like in a fish offals mainly the fish bones 
and the scale s. So, what is the difference between this fish gelatin and the fish glue? T he only 
difference is like the that in case of fish gelatin it has much higher gell ing strength, it is much 
clear  in nature like the loop wise  and it has very lesser impurity content .  
Some manufacturers even refer that gelatin  as a top-grade  glue and  why they have the lesser 
impurity content. I will discuss about it in details now like in few minutes . So, in general, it 
actually one of the main reason is the procedure that we use . The procedure that we use to 
produce this fish gelat in it i s actually the re ason why we have a less impurity content than the 
normal fish glue, which we normally extract from the fish scale s and all scales  and all . So,  
what is the procedure ? In general, we it is like almost same as fish glue, but the only exception is at the step of pretreatment or the treatment we treated with th e wea k alkali 
medium to remove the dirt and extraneous proteins .  
Because of this weak alkali treatment, it actually has lesser impurity than the fish glue. It also 
soften  the tissue, which is also known as the macerati . So,  because of this macerati  or 
macerating , what happened is fish gelatin formed  and it actually soften the tissue like much 
better within the other procedures. And also, it also has a step of treatment wit h a weak acid 
at the end to neutralize the remnant based on previous treatment and at t he end, the product 
that we get it has very high adhesive properties.  
(Refer Slide Time:  03:52)  
 
You can see the procedure . First,  we take the fish offals. W e wash it 3 to 4 hour in runni ng 
water, preferably cold water. T hen we go for this best treatment what we call this a week 
alkaline treatment . 0.5 percent  is sodium hydroxide , 3 times . Then we wash it again 3 to 4 
hour in the running water. T hen we drain the water a nd then we go for the acid treatment . 
Acid treatment with the using the weak acids . Then the washing is done . Then the heat 
extraction is done to get the gelatin out of it .  
So, what is the application of this gelatin  that we can get out of this aquaculture  this fishery 
byproduct is it can be used for the preparation of photosensitive film. It can be used for high 
strength blue as we already discussed, because of it is a very high adhesive properties. It can 
be used as  an excellent base materi al for the emulsion preparation . So, these are the different 
procedures,  I mea n like this is the difference a pplications of gelatin  in that we can normally 
utilize .  (Refer Slide Time:  05:00)  
 
Then a nother important byproduct of fish is roe or  the caviar or in simple word it is like the 
fish egg . This roes are the eggs of fish like salmon, carp and catfish s and the process flow is 
all the eggs of starch and fish are called the caviar . This caviar is it is a delicacy in the 
northern I mean if you go more towards the Russian area I mean like all the countries which 
were in USSR earlier and also if you go to the Scandinavian countries  there this caviar  is a 
kind a  delicacy .  
The preparation  procedure is t here. You can find caviar  with like 5 dollar packet and when 
you can get it in 5,000 dollar of packet which people give it you as a gift for a very high 
costly gift for even your in with different functions and also . That means you can realize a 
food is given as a gift in  even marriage ceremony even and also that means it does contain it 
does have a very high value or it does have a very high amount of acceptance reading in this 
region and they really love it  and this caviar.  In India it is not very famous because first of all 
the in a caviar form  it is not famous but we normally eat the fish eggs. But caviar  is really 
tasty and it needs some treatment procedure. There are some procedures by which we can 
prepare it . I will d iscus s about it in coming slide .  
In general , what is the reason behind i t? W hy we want to go ahead with the caviar ? It does 
contain high amount of protein almost 30 to 40  percent  of protein . It does contain some 
amount of fat also . It almost m ost carbohydrate free. It is like almost carp free. I t has protein , 
it has fat at a proper content and also it contains a huge a lot of different important 
micronutrients and vitamins and all. All the vitamin be  various vitamin A , vitamin K and also. So, all because of the  prese nce of this enriched nutrient, t he caviar  is not only a delicacy 
but it is very much sought after for your health benefits as well .  
So, also it is rich in  different essential amino acids like the isoleucine lysine and the 
methionine . And the fat content as we just as I told you like 4  percent  to 40  percent  it varies 
depending on the species . The caviar  the procedure of the process that by which the caviar  is 
produced, it is called maturation and salting . The rules are generally preserved in salt i f the 
processing into caviar  is not desired immediately but even in caviar  after you form it caviar  
and then also it is you use some brine solution .  
There is a very specific way of preparing this brine solution s and then yo u use it for 
preserving so that is my caviar  it is little bit salty in nature because of the presence of this 
brine  solution. In some part of the world the caviar  there is a pasteurized in or der to have a 
better storage lif e. It is very popular in Russia and the Scandinavian countries as  I told you .  
(Refer Slide Time:  08:19)  
 
So, the what is the procedure ? You first remove the egg . Then you wash it and then salt and 
the coloration is done. After then on the maturation is when after it reaches the maturation 
stage you store it at 5 degrees Celsius. T hough, you store it at 5 degrees Celsius that proper 
storing and all proper packaging and all , still it is better to have it as soon as possible. It has a 
very low shelf life . In general, i t has a very low shelf life , so better to have it  as soon as 
possible  it prepare .  
So, that i s it like it is if you see in future if you go in a European region and if you see the 
caviar in the supermarket and all you  see the when you buy it, the one specific type of caviar which called beluga, this is t he most costliest one . This beluga species they can live up to 100 
years and all but they can only give you egg like 5 or 6 times in your lifespan and that is why 
it makes it so rare. And because of that it is that cost ly it is  beluga species  the caviar  coming 
from the beluga species.  
Other than salmon  and all this other cat fishes  if you collect they are very they a re even local . 
You can have it as low as 5 dollar for this kind of packet and all. I am just giving you just 
example. But whereas if you want to buy the beluga, this black caviar, it is super costly. It is 
called Black Gold almost .  
(Refer Slide Time:  09:50)  
 
So, what are the other types of byproducts that we can get the fish maws  and the is inglass ? It 
is actually produced from the air bladder of the fish . What we d o? We use the dryer air 
bladder which is known as the fish maws  and when it is clean and this dried air bladder like 
when it is there as it is we call it is isinglass .  
So, that means when it is clean condition is drying in a air bladders and all  so, then we call 
them it is fish maws  and another one is very isinglass. T his swim bladders which are obtaine d 
from fish belong to this Polynemidae,  Sciaenidae  and this Siluridae  families are normally 
used for this isinglass  preparation .  
So, normally what we how what is the preparation procedure ? We try to get we remove it 
from the fish from its belly cavity this air bladders an d then they are cleaned off by  with all 
the adhering  floods blood vessels and other impurities by washing and rubbing . And then the sac is split open and the innermost layer is also cleaned to remove the blood vessels . And that 
air bla dder is actually used for this  fish maws or  preparation of fish maws  or the isinglass .  
(Refer Slide Time:  11:05)  
 
So, in general after you take out this after the inner layer and outer layer and all the blood 
vessels and all its removed, then it is dried for several hours in the shade  to get the perfectly 
dried product . Then it is preserved for like many days and transported for the further 
processing. In general , in the processing what they do ?  
They again soaked in water for several hour. A nd they cut into small pieces and placed 
between the two rollers to form 3 to 6 millimete r thick films  or the ribbon s. This is repeatedly 
dried and again placed in this ribbon this make this thick film or even to make it the isinglass 
that we talked about .  
So, it is then rolled and cut into sheets and stacked. It  can be obtained in the form of flake,  
leaf, powder or thin strip as well . So,  what is the properties of this isinglass? T his actually 
isinglass has a very specific property when the moment you take it and when you put it in the 
water, it will swell a lot.  And specifically,  when it is heated at 60 to 80 degrees Celsius, the 
native  collagen  is converted into gelatin  and having a adhesive  property as well . In the one of 
the major use of isinglass is impurity in the alcohol . It is soluble in both acid and alka line but 
it is insoluble in alcohol .  (Refer Slide Time:  12:32 ) 
 
Because of this reason, it is used in the alcohol industries and all as a clarifying agent . You 
see the fish swim bladders and all and this commercial fish maws  and the isinglass  how it 
looks like . An application , you see the application the first and major application is the 
clarifying agent as in beverages.  
It also can be used in as adhesive base when it is when you hit it a little bit 50 to 60 degree 
Celsius  and then use it as  adhesive base as well.  It can be used as a chill proof ing agent . It can 
be used in the manufacture of the Indian ink. I t is a specific type of ink that is used that is 
sometimes we call them Indian inks , sometimes it is called a Chinese ink also . So, it is used 
for preparation of this Indian ink or the Chinese .  
(Refer Slide Time:  13:21)  
 What are the ano ther byproducts that I will be discussing and which will be the like the last I 
would say like discussion about the different byproducts, fish -bypro ducts, but though there 
are plenty of others. But I will stop here with this pearl  essence only because like because of 
time constraint  I cannot discuss more and more. B ut I definitely request you to go ahead and 
search for the additional information about  the different fish -byproducts.  
In case of pearl essence,  it is actually commercially it is a commercial product. It is prepared 
from the scales of finfishes . Why it is called pearl essence, I will tell you in couple of 
minutes . So, in general these scales . It is a shiny and lustrous  substances this pearl essence 
that we prepare . It is extracted from the scales a nd when it is used for different decorative 
coating . Because of his texture because of its look, and all it is called it can it is it replace d 
the pearl, I a m telling you the reason why the skills in general it contains a material called 
guanine which is an organic compound . It is a lustrous material actually, which is organic 
components with a purine bas, 2 amino 6 oxypurine .  
This guanine whe n it combination with the collagen and the calcium phosphate , it yields  a 
shining silvery metal which called the pyrolysis . So, this guanine is the reason which is 
present in the fish  scale . This guanine when it  reacts with collagen and the calcium phosphate 
it produces this pearl  essence . So, let us go ahead with that step by step discussion about the 
preparation method of this pearl essence.  First,  the removal of scales . The scales are carefully 
strapped off fr om the fishes . To start with then the scale of this fish processing industries can 
also be used for this purpose .  
(Refer Slide Time:  15:26)  
 And then the washing and agitation is done . Adhering the dirt  because the scale it has a lot of 
different foreign  particles and solid particles . So, to remove this dirt it is done by washing in 
clean water and agitated  in order to relieve the guanine crystals . So,  once it is done, it is 
normally done in the horizontal drumless structure.  
Fitted with the revolving stirrer  with the pure water and the suspension which obtained in 
centrifugation this is after the centrifugation is done to separate the crude guanine which 
contains the exogenous protein as well. This released  guanine crystals or the guanine material 
that which we get from after this drum  filtration is done I mean like the drum filter based 
centrifugation  is done and this what we call washing agitation process .  
This guanine crystals are settled at the bottom of bottom and which is treated with acetic acid . 
So, once we treated with the acetic acid and in order to further remove all the microbial 
content and all if any other foreign particles are there to get rid of it and then we can use it for 
the deprot eination .  
Deproteinization is what it is a to adhering the protein fragments like which are there i n this 
guanine  crystals are removed by treating it with a 0.25 percentage papain  or pepsin weight by 
weight percentage for 48 hours at ambient temperature . After then this de protein ized guanine  
cryst als are separated by precipitating solvent ether or gasoline . So,  once the precipitation 
process is done , now you have your guanine samples ready with you  which is like in ether or 
any ether  type solution or gasoline solution .  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:25)  
 Then you can wash it the remaining fat . You can normal ly wash it with the dry ether or  the 
benzene  and then you can store it as a clean guanine crystals . This guanine crystals which are 
normally stored in ether and ether acetate . They can be mixed with lacquer  and sealed in a 
glass container or this can be used for this  is the this  guanine actually the material that we 
normally we the major I would say like raw material for this pearl  essence preparation . So,  
what is the reason why do we want to go for t his pearl essence? There is different reason for 
it.  
First of all, the actual pearl  which we normally get from the wastage and  it is very costly. But 
this is an alternative procedure for manufacturing the artificial pearl. I t has a very good 
property . It is almost similar properties and texture as like pearl  and it can be utilized to 
alternate to mimic the natural pearl. A s a decorative protein in the mirror blacks  you might 
have seen in the mirror the backside of the mirror we have this silver coating in general 
normally we do it .  
So, earlier days , people used to do mercury  coating and all sometimes people like in general 
this is also a famous alternative this pearl essence with that it is very low-cost metal  so with 
that you can put a coating so that it is a very essential when you prepare this mirror backs. It 
is used for coat ing in the decorative coating in the umbrella handles, electric fancy switches 
and also other cosmetic articles.  
So, these are the different users of the like users of this pearl e ssence and this just I am 
reminding you this pearl essence is not actually coming from the pearl  as we discussed it is 
coming from the fish scale . So, there are a procedure of sea water pearl , freshwater pearl  and 
this is the artificial pearl that is how we can make the artificial pearl  from the any from any 
fishes.  (Refer Slide Time:  19:40)  
 
You can see the products that this content guanine crystals . It can make this glass mirror 
which is in the left bottom . If you see which is coming from this silvery anyway you see like 
the silvery shade of this scale  in any fish normally the spin fishes. S o, that can be used for 
foundation which is used to formulate a foun dation that highlights the scale . It is used for nail  
polish, which can give this proper finish to your nail. T he fake pearl  it can or artificial pearl  it 
does no t seem fake pearl. It  can be utilized for replacing the actual making  the natural pearl. 
It can be used for different  other personal care products like lipsticks or even the eyeshadows .  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:28)  
 
So, in conclusion, like from this last two lecture, what we have understood that there is no 
part in the fish that can go waste . As I already mentioned, I a m again saying it to you that waste is n othing but a misplaced resource. W e just need to know that how we can utilize . So, 
it is properly utilized, this fish processing byproducts can be a very highly economic 
proposition or very high economic return you can get out of it once you go f or this kind of 
byproduct utilization. I t not only reuse this product, which are normally we throw away, 
which can be considered as waste .  
So, it will also help, somehow sustaining the proper sustainable application of aquaculture 
because you are not crea ting any envi ronmental nuisance, is no t it? So, that the other way it is 
like it is it is outside like as a perfect example of sustainable development of aquaculture. 
And that is why we really should go ahead with this byproduct utilization.  
(Refer Slide Time:  21:47)  
 
So, the takeaway message that we know that fish scales  can be used as a guanine based fish 
essence pearl essence , and which is something I hope like you really are very much 
enthusiastic to know more in detail . So,  I would definitely request you to go ahead with the 
Google you can  search  it. There you can find more details about it and it is very fascinating. 
The bones scales  can be used for the extraction of glue and gelatin.   
The air bladder  can be used for the pr eparation of isinglass , which has vario us application. 
One of the most important application is the clarifying agent in beverage industry, because it 
is insoluble in alcoho l, but it is soluble in alkali and the  acid. So, these are the takeaway 
message from  this last two lecture material, I would say .  (Refer Slide Time:  22:37)  
 
This the reference you can see . You can go ahead and so in general, I hope you get to know 
about the essential the requisites fo r preparation of different kind of fish -byproduct or  I would 
say aquatic species by products, and how we can utilize them and how we can make some 
product out of it so that it can be beneficial for you as the farm manager, or suppose if you 
are a service provider, you can utilize each and every part of your farm product .  
So, that i s how you not only creating further employment opportunity, further economic 
return, but also you a re helping the environmental sustainably like I mean, like you a re not 
ruining the environment in because of this waste deposition . So, I hope these lectures  is 
actually helpful to you. Y ou got to know a lot of information’s . And I hope it will steer your 
mind to go ahead further and learn more about it . So, definitely I woul d be very happy to help 
you if I can do it by anyhow . So, that i s it for now. See you in the next lecture. Thank you so 
much.  