Advance d Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmic k 
Department  of Agriculture  and food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Lecture  60  
Mitigation  and Adaptive  Strategies  (Contd. ) 
(Refer  Slide  Time : 0:27)  
 
Hello  everyone,  welco me to the fifth lecture  material  of module  12 Environmental  
Consideration  of Aquaculture.  My name  is Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick , I am from  the 
Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  department  of IIT Kharagpur.   
In this lecture  material  will be continuing  with the discussion  that we already  had in the last 
four lecture s about  the impact  of climate  change  on aquaculture.  So, in this particular  lecture  
material,  I will mainly  be focusing  on the key changes  and the impact  of climate  change  on 
inland  fisheries  along with its potential  adaptation  strategies  and opportunities  and all .  
If you remember  in earlier  lecture,  we discuss  about  the mitigation  strategies  and all . Here we 
will mainly  be focusing  on adaptation  approaches  and opportunities.  We will also discus s 
about  the adap tation  in non-fishery  sectors  and their impacts  on the inland  fisheries  and what  
are the potential  opportunities  for adaptation  in inland  fisheries  regarding  the same . At the 
end, we will conclude  it with the challenges  to successful  adapta tion proposed  strategies  and 
how we can mitigate  those  challenges  will be discussed  in detail s.  
 
 (Refer  Slide  Time : 1:35)  
 
 
So, if you see in this table,  we mainly  like, we can see the different  key changes  and the 
impacts  of if you see the left most  column  is the impact of climate  change  in the inland  
fisheries  and their loss and the opportunities  are given  and at the end it is discussed  about  the 
adaptation  strategies.  Just to give you one example  suppose,  because  of the air and the water  
temperature  which  is getting increased  because  of the climate  change  activities  and all over 
the world .  
Because  of that what  is happening  it is because  what  are the loss that we are facing  as a say 
suppose  a beneficiary  of inland  fisheries , negative  shift in the conditions  for cold and some  
cases  cold adapted  fishes,  loss of ice cover  and which  because  of that the reduced  ice 
thickness  which  actually  prevent  the access  to fisheries  and transport  of catch  and gear 
personnel  in the polar  in a mostly  in the Arctic regio ns and Antarctic  regions , reduction  in the 
average  size of your catch , potential  local  extinction  of the species  as is happening  because  of 
the changes  in the temperature  and all .  
Now,  we already  discussed  in earlier  lectures  in in detail about  all these  parameters  or the 
losses or the cons part of it once the temperature  is getting  changed  because  of the climate  
change . What are the opportunities,  it always  lies there  is always  other  side of the coin so it is 
always  like that.  
So, because of these  change s in temperature , in the temperate  and the Arctic  regions  people  
are now can do, go for fishing  for more  amount  of time in a particular  year because  earlier  it used to cover  with the snow  and ice sheet,  but now,  as because  of the tempera ture changes,  
those  ice sheets  are vanishe d and those  snow  cover  is not anymore . 
And at least it was there  it is there  for a shorter  period  of time in a year.  Because  of that what  
is happening  larger  amount  of fishing  season . The fishing  season  is getting  extended,  
expanded  or extended.  So, there people  can go for maximum  amount  of catch in the capture  
fisheries  sector . It also lowers  the expenditure  on heating  the house  and the business  
premises , if you relate  to the aquaculture , aquaculture  farm  and the hatchery  designer  
hatchery  structure  and all . So, what happened,  we do not need  to provide  it with a much  of a 
heating  or cooling  systems , especially  the heating  systems  in this particular  scenario . 
What are the adaptation  strategies  that we need  to follow  to get rid of to minimize  the losses  
or minimize  the any future  effect  on your system . You have  to go for establishing  long term 
monitoring  to provide  your managers,  your fishers  and your stakeholders  with the relevant  
information.  There  should  be proper  adaptive  management  approaches  that should  be adopt  
and apply  in your farm  in your inland  fisheries  or you go for deep  sea fisheries,  which  will 
allow  you to flexibility  to the advantage  of the opportunities  or any possible  calamities  that is 
that can be forecasted  from  befor e that it will definitely  happe n with just a matter  of time.   
And if you are having  ready  with your adaptive  strategies  or the management  approaches,  
definitely  it will be beneficial  for you. You can develop  new ecological  knowledge  abou t by 
collaboration  between  the fishery  professiona ls and the fisheries  so that they will the fisheries  
they will utilize  the technologies  which  are very up to date on the cutting -edge  situation  right  
now. People  can use those  technology  and adopt  it even  before  any future  event will take 
place  which  can cause some  disruptive  changes  in the existing  conventional  technologies  and 
conventional  way of fishing.  
Increasing  the frequency  and intensity  of hot and warmer  weather  we discussed  about  El 
Nino , La Nina  and all in earlier  discussion,  earlier  lecture  wher e I told you like, how these  
different  changes  in the climate  scenario  are affecting  the aquaculture  in general.  So, if you 
see again  like the loss is like in the increase  in the acute  therma l stress on fish, it increased  the 
sunstroke , increased risk of sunstroke  in a requirement  of the refrigeration of catch  and air 
conditioning  is increased  and all . 
There is no obvious  opportunity  has been  found  with this kind of natural  calamity  or disaster  
to occur.  Because  of these  chang es in intensity  of hot and warm  climate  weather  in the in an area,  which  is surprising  for it to have  in general . Like in European  countries  nowadays,  like 
in for last couple  of years,  the temperature  is rising  like anything,  which  is not even  like in 
the last 10 years,  I think  at least 5 to 6 years  of out of this 10 years  in the last decade  was 
considered  as one of the top 5 hottest  year ever recorded  in a European  continental  point  of 
view.   
So, it is like very rare, lot of climate  change  is actually  real and it is actually  changing  the 
behavior  weather  pattern like anything  because  of that climate  is changing  and has this drastic  
effect  on aquaculture . And how we can adapt  it, we can produce  new norms  for the work  on 
health  and safety  details,  we can deve lop the infrastructure  like cold storage  or refrige ration 
unit or biosecurity  systems  to mainly  to enhance  them  to maintain  the quality  of the catch  
through  the human  food chain . 
 (Refer Slide  Time : 7:03)  
  
 
Shift in isotherm  the poleward  or the altitud inal or which  is causing  the following  warming . 
You know  what  is isotherm ? Isotherm  is a line where  you have  the similar  temperature.  So, 
this isotherm  supposes  earlier  30-degree  Celsius isotherm  was there  at that particular  day of 
on year, suppose  over Madhya  Pradesh  just to give you one example  over the Madhya  
Pradesh  just in the middle  of India .  
Suppose  after but during  what  you will witness  suppose  in the next year,  it is supposed  to be 
in the Madhya  Pradesh  over Madhya  Pradesh,  but it is over now Uttar Pradesh  it is going  
towards  it is sorry,  it is going  towards  I am doing  it another  word Madhya  Pradesh  to suppose  
it is in Karnataka  towards  the like the any shift in this change  any shift in the, in this isotherm  
is detrimental , but specifically  if it is changing  towards  the polar  side more  in the polar side, 
like in the first scenario  Madhya  Pradesh  to Uttar  Pradesh  it is like in the polar  side like we 
are in the northe rn hemisphere.  So, the more  north  you go it is more  polar  side.  
So, just to give you some  example  do not it is not the actual  scenari o. And the more  you go to 
the polar  side or more  you go to the altitudinal.  What do you mean  by altitudinal , suppose  in 
general,  at a particular  moment  of time say like at a particular  day of in year,  the temperature  
line, this isotherm  should  be there  at thousand -meter  height,  say like 20 degrees  Celsius  at 
thousand -meter  height  with air because  of the climate  change , instead  of 1000  meter  these  20 
degrees  Celsius  or isotherm  line is now at 1500  at say like a below  than that.  
Obviously,  because  like because  the temperature  is increasing  at that particular  height  
100,000  meter  now,  the temperature  isotherm  is 25 degrees  Celsius,  because  the temperature  is changing.  So, theoretically  it should  be having  20 degrees Celsius,  but now,  the isotherm  is 
getting  isotherm  is 20-degree  Celsius  isotherm  is now in suppose  in 900-meter  height . 
Because , that 1000  meter  it is already  reaching  the 25 degrees  Celsius  because  of the 
temperature  change .  
So, this is just to give you some  idea how it works , this shift in isothe rms. Because  of that 
what  is happening  shift in fish distribution  is happening  in novel  fish communities  are formed  
with no current  analogues  and unknown  interactions  and all  and it can come  up with some  
possibility  or possible  opportunities  like new fishery  oppor tunities  which  can offset  the 
existing  fishery  problems .  
And what  are the adaptation  technology  that we can do? We can train and possibly  fund the 
fishers  to change  their gears  and prepare  them  for new reality  and that particular  place  that 
they are norma lly go for culturing  or like their culture  I mean,  like their rearing species.  
We can establ ish a long-term monitoring  to provide  the managers  and fishers  with the 
information  that will allow  them  to adhere  to the most  in advanced  adaptive  strategies  in the 
management  system . Changes  in the precipitation , shift in the seasonal  pattern  of the 
precipitation,  it does have  a drastic  effect  on the aquaculture , because  in aquaculture  most  of 
the pond  you like what  happen  say, most  of the inland  fisheries  they detrimentates.  
Even a couple  of years  back  even  on tickets  back  also people  are mostly depending  on the 
temper  mostly  depending  on the season , rainy season  and the rainy  season  they reserve  the 
water  and that water  it enriches  the groundwater  and that groun dwater  once  the rainy  season  
will go settle  in the winter  people  will like they are expecting  the groundwater  to recharge  
their pond  and it depends  what  type of pond it is groundwater  based  pond,  rain water  based  
pond , pond  depending  on different  types,  but in general  rainy  season  and the season  is one of 
the major  factor  of enriching , the supplying  the water  fresh  water  for your pond,  if it is a very 
huge  size, extensive  aquaculture  pond .  
However,  with time the precipitation  pattern  is changing , the place  where  it used to be a huge  
amount  of rainfall  even  10 years  back  also now,  it is facing  drastic  drought  and the other  
place  where  it is supposed  to be drought  and it is a desert  area,  they are facing  drastic,  huge  
amount  of rainfall  of precipitation  in certain like with very uncertain  manner.   
So, that is happening  it because  of this, it has an impact  on the aquaculture  production  
around.  So, but how we can adapt  we can develop  new ecological  knowledge , by collaboration  between  the fishery  professional  and fishers . We can train and possibly  fund the 
fishers  to change  their gears  and to prepare  them  with a new reality.   
This increased  frequency  and the intensity  of extreme  precipitation  event , it is simp le mostly  
the cyclonic  event  like strong  event  and all suppose  like flood  situation , drought  situation . All 
the situation  does have  a impact on aquaculture  production  of your farm  whether  it be inland  
from  inland  fisheries  or just have  a major  impact . 
Because the availability  of water  because  of the availabilit y of other  sources  transportation  
everything  can get halt. So, you have  to ensur e the buffer  zone  which  are which  has to be 
accessible  for fish and promote  their survival  and growth  for any kind of scenario , the water  
should  be there  and a particular  qualit y so that fish or your culture  will sustain  any situation.   
So, increas e in discharge  or flooding  situation  you have  to restore  the environmental  cues or 
the flows  and habitats  and high value  migrato ry fishes  in those  catchments.  Those  have  the 
under  can the over extraction  of the water . You can increase  the capacity  of fishers  to capture  
those  fishes  that benefit  from  the change . Reduction  in discharge  and flooding  and the water  
level  what  is the adaptation  strategy , you h ave to increase  the capacity  of fishe rs to capture  
those  fishes  that benefit  from  this kind of changes  and all . 
 
(Refer  Slide  Time : 13:16 )  
 
What  do I mean  by the like biological  impact ? There is some  biological  impact  also because  
of the changes  in climate  change . What is happening,  new species  introduction  is happening,  why I am saying  this new species  introduction  because  of say the climate  change , what  is 
happening  because  of the storm  events  are happening , because  of the changes  in the oceanic  
event,  which  led new species  to introduce  to a particular  ecosystem . And in that particular  
ecosystem  for them, it is a exotic  species .  
So, what  will happen  they have  a competition  because  of the native  fish and the say exotic  
fish, this exotic  fish can be the predator  of the native  fish, which  can comple tely damage  the 
whole  ecosystem.  On the other  way around  maybe,  the exotic  fish is very much  rich with the 
nutrients  and all and your native  fish will they will be very happy  and they will be having  
new food on their production  will can increase  anything  can happen.  So, this comes  under  the 
loss and opportunity  of this kind of situation  or how to set this event.   
So, what  can be the adaptive  strategies,  we have  to establish  long term monitor ing to provide  
the all the stakeholders  with the information  releva nt information  about  the possible  changes  
that may happen  in future  and you have  to allow  for the flexibility  in the regulatory  agencies  
to allow  the fishing  of non-native  species  as their exploitation  may not be legal , but they can 
have  some  flexibility  because  that this non-native  species  can be risky  for your native  
species.  So, you can go and you can capture  them  in a special  case basis,  case to case basis .  
Changes  in the contaminant  cycle increase  in the temperature  and the change  in the discharge  
it results  in the mobilization  in the contamination , those contamination  can be bio 
accumulated  and can be transferred  to human  body  itself.  Can it possible , because  from  the 
fish, it will go to the higher  portion  and from  there  maybe  from  us or maybe  directl y from  the 
fish?  So, the same  way,  the better  is to go for increase  in the assessment  of the fish quality  
and to increase  the consumer  confidence  in general  and they can start having  the fish. 
So, that is more  important  and also you have  to establish  a long-term monitoring  to provide  
any kind any changes  or you can provide  the sensors  and all in a different  place s. So, we will 
get the real time information  about  the contaminant  the pollutant  level  of your water  of your 
like farm  water,  where  your culture  species  is being  reared. Changes  in the parasite  in the 
disease,  definitely  different  new temperature  limited  parasites  are coming  into the action  
because  of this climate  change.   
And earlier  those  species  are not this body  or then, they are how to say they are in there is 
safeguard  system  that they have. There their immunity  is like a not build  up for this kind of 
parasites  to tackle  and to handle  this. So, because  of that you need  to introdu ce some  like medicin al application  so that your fishes or your fish or whatever  the aquatic  species  you are 
culturing,  they can be they can sustain  in those  kinds  of adverse  situations  and all . So, that is 
why you need  to train and employ  the specialist  and educate  the fisher  medics  and the public  
in general  with this kind of busin esses . 
(Refer  Slide  Time : 16:52 )  
 
What are the changes  in the human  population,  how it can affect  the aquaculture,  the 
migration  and the increased  human  population  density ? First of all, most  of the like 
nowadays,  if you go back  3 to 4 decades  back  also and now that changes  in the populat ion in 
the sea and population  in the cities , and population  in the urban  and rural  areas  is changing  
like anything  a drastic  shift from  the rural area to the urban  area is happening , a lot of people  
are now focusing  on a very specific  regions  in this very specific  places,  which  has very high 
employability  and all this.  
There are differen t reasons  because  of the resources  that is available  in that place.  So, this 
shift because  of this population  change  or population  density  changes in the population  
density , some  places  becoming  population ally very dense  and some  spaces  becoming  much  
lighter , it is not as dense  as it was earlier . Both the cases  it has effect  on the aquaculture  
because  the aquaculture  production,  it depends  upon  the demand  upon  the market  demand.  
So, if the market  demand  is changing  time to time,  so, based  on that, you have  to strategize  
your plan in such a way so that it will not get harmed  even  if the population  is getting  shifting  
from  one place  to another . Another  impact  is likely  to increased  tourism  in those  areas  which  
can currently  limited  by the climate  because  the changes  in the tourism  if you see that like no tourism  busin esses  very much  depend  because  suppose  if you are having  tourists  from  
European  region in India  in a specific  place, what  will happen  people  are from  say like 
European  in general,  I am just giving  you example  a very generalized  discussion.   
So, they are very much  fond of sea fish, any fish in general.  So, for them,  we need  to prepare  
our place  with the amount  of because the demand  is very high,  because  that place  is very 
much  famous  for the particular  type of people  who like to have  a fish, who like to have  a sea 
fish, who like to have  fish in general  whether  it be inland  or sea fish.  
So, for them you have  to catego ry you have  to generalize  your market  in such a way and also 
you have  based on that based  on the market  demand  you have  to make  sure that demand  is 
fulfilled  by from  your farm , from  designing  more  amount  of farm , from  establis hing more  
amount  of farm  in the nearby  areas.   
(Refer  Slide  Time : 19:29)  
 
 
So, these  are the different  adaptive  strategies  that we can adhere  to with the change  in this, 
because  of the climate  change  and the fishery  sector.  What  happened  to the non-fishe ry 
sector ? I mean  like the because of the climate  change,  the non-fishery  sectors  are also getting  
affected , how they can somehow  passively  affect  the aqua culture  as well.  Suppose  an urban  
and industrial  areas  what is happening,  say like increase  in the absorption  and the storage  of 
water to meet  the demand  for potable  drinking  water.   So, which  is not directly  related  to your aquaculture,  because  it is like extracting  more  
amount of water  from  say a particular  source . It can be a surface  water  source,  it can be a 
groundwater  source,  whatever  it is, it is extracting  the water  which  is not the same  amount  
like it was before.  So, before  the aquaculture  before  your aqua culture  they were  even  having  
ample  amount  of supply,  but because  of this change  in this abstraction  in the storage  process , 
because  of the supply  of the potable  water , what  is happening ? The water  availability  getting  
reduced .  
In that case you have  to develop  and manage  a recreational and the food fisheries  in 
accordance  with the water  body  potenti al. So, that has to be well developed  from  the, you 
have  to be preplanned  it according  to the forecast  that you can receive  from  the experts . 
Urban and the industrial  protection  and the demands  of protection  demands  for flood  control  
and the river  training  and because  of that, it is like you have  to develop  proper  flood  
management  plan that meets  the requirement  of the water  managers  and aquat ic ecosystem .  
Changes  in the emission  of the pollutant  in air or water  to mitigate  the climate  change.  And 
becaus e of that, you have  to establish  how we can adapt  you have  to establish  a proper  
monitoring  program  to provide  all your stakeholders  with relevant  information  with any 
minor  changes.  So, once  these  changes  is happening,  your system  should  be ready  with the 
adapti ve strategy , system  should  be ready  by them  the moment  it will change  in actual  
scenario  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 21:39)  
 Changes  in the food and forestry  production  sector say like changes  in the conditions  like 
temperature  precipitation,  carbon  dioxid e conce ntration,  which  actually  helps  shift from  
pastoral  to arable  farming,  new crops,  sowing  period,  reduction  of fallow  periods  all these  
changes  in the agricultural  sector. How it is actually  relevant  to the aquaculture , because  this 
changes  in this agricultural  factor are actually  very much  involved  with aqua culture , because  
they are all interrelated  in terms  of resource  in a particular  place .  
People  are resource  constr ained  it is not that unless  until you are a providing  exporting  or 
impo rting  from  outside  mainly  your resource  constrained  in a particular  place,  you have  a 
very meaning  like exact  amount  of resource  which  has to be diverted  to agriculture  and 
aquaculture  in a similar  way or say like in a particular  ratio for a certain  reason , if your 
agriculture  is blooming  or agriculture  is like resource  need  is like blooming , what  will happen  
it will have  an impact  on your aquaculture  sources.   
So, you have  to develop  this catchment  level  management  plan to minimize  the impact  of the 
receiv ing water  and you have  to allow  for an overall  improvement  management  in the fishery  
sector  that can be the adaptation  strategy  that you can follow . Changing  in the precipitation  
demand  which  increase  the agricultural  irrigation  and irrigat ed land and the construction  of 
water  storage  pond .  
For irrigation , you have  to initiate  the stocking  programs  and the stock  management  from  the 
beginning  in your aquaculture  that can be your adaptati on strategy . Flood proofing of road 
and these  conurbations  are not because  of that what will happen?  We have  to undertake  the 
mitigation  actions  to the fish transport  weir in between  or select  culvert  structure  in between  
this flood proofing road.   
So, at least this the fish it will not be considered  as a refuge  it will it can easily  go to its 
habitat  within  the system  and by this fish friendly  water  management  and the insured  which  
can ensure  the minimum  flow and water  level  and has to be properly  develope d so that fish 
can easily  move from  one place  to another.   
So, these  are the adaptation  strategies  that you can develop  you can adapt  for this change  in 
order  to adapt  with the non-fishery  sectors  the adaptation  in the non-fishery  sector  and based  
on that their passive  adaptation  will be will look like this inland  fisheries  point  of view .  (Refer  Slide  Time : 24:14 )  
 
 
 
These are the examples  of the guidebooks  and the toolkit  that you can use to how to say like 
in the fisheries  and aquaculture  sector  at AdaptME,  Defra  and CLIMER,  USAI D, so, these  
are the I think  you should  take a you can take a click  and you can search  for it, this contents  
are very useful.  It will give you a very nice information . It will enhance  your knowledge  
about  the adaptation  strateg y and all whatever  I have  discussed.  This will definitely  help you 
to understand  it much better  way.  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 24:51 )  
 So, what  are the challenges  to the successful  adaptation  and the proposed  strategies  are there  
which  like I have  already  discu ssed in the last 2 lectures  in general . So, you know, the 
adaptation  why we want  to go for adapta tion to start with you remember . It is the most  
practical  short -term solution  to the climate  change.  However,  the implementation  may face 
some various  types  of challenges.   
One of the majo r more  important  most  important  challenge  includes  the failure  to 
acknowl edge  the climate  changes,  which  will have  different  effects  on the producers  based  on 
the climate  factors  like their specific  environment  and the region,  the knowledge  regarding  
the climate  change , community  dynamics,  population , economic  condition  in the present  
industrial  scenario .  
All this knowledge  has to be there  and you have  to acknowledge  the changes  in the climat ic 
situation  that is the problem , you know, I am feeling  bad to say we are very much  advance 
the human  civilization,  we when  call the science  program , it is advanced  like anything,  but 
still maximum  part of the population  does not believe  in climate  change.  And they this do not 
bother  about  the changes  that is happening  in the climate  and then they keep  doing  the 
notorious  stuff that are keep  that are repetitively  delivered  by the experts  to not to do. 
They are keep  on saying  to do this, this, this, in fact, this you have  to you have  to chang e, you 
have  to do some  behavioral  change  in order  to adapt  to the climat ic changing  situation,  and 
you have to reduce  the effect  anthropogenic  effect  on the climate  change  situation,  but it is 
not being  followed,  it is not being  acknowledged  by majority  of the population .  
It is a failure  of the policymaker,  it is a failure  of the education  system,  I would  say, but, 
definitely , I am hopeful  like people  are changing,  things  are changing,  and it will within  a 
couple  within  very soon,  people  will be like each and every  one will be very much  adhered  to 
the problem  that is associated  with the climate . They will acknowledge  the change  that 
climate  change  scenario,  and they will do the best of their ability  to retrieve  the situation  to 
somehow  make  the world  in a bit better  place  again . 
Other  than that, the biased  and unrealistic  assessment  of the potential  risks associated  with 
climate  change  may deceive  the policymakers  and the aquaculture  producers  in taking  the 
necessary  precautions,  because  sometimes  it what  happened  people  do follow  fake results,  
fake information , even  suppose  a scientist  very famous,  very renowned  expert,  when  they do 
research  maybe  because  of certain  problem  because  every  person  is, they are supposed  to do a it is not something  impossible  for like, it is not something  it is not people  are not computer  
they do make  errors,  they do make  mistakes .  
Because  of this mistake , because  of certain  mistakes  or certain  mistakes in  calculation  and all , 
the end result  that has been  shown  by the expe rts or the scientists  to the policymakers  may 
deceive  them,  so that they will keep  on adapting  the strategies  based on the results  that results  
which  are erroneous.  So, this is also a problem  that it has to be cross  checked  by 2, 3 different  
other  experts  or other educational  body  or an institution.  So, to be 100 percent  sure about  the, 
this assessment  results  and all, and based  on that, the policymakers  should  act accordingly  
and at the earliest  possible . 
(Refer  Slide  Time : 28:38 )  
 
Though,  other  than in order  to address  all those  things,  there  is an urgent  need  to ensure  that 
the policy  formulation  related  to the climate  change  interventions  like to meet  producer  
needs,  in their specific  situation  especially  in more  vulnerable  countries.  Another  major 
challenge  to successful  adaptation  intervention  is the capacity  of producers  in terms  of their 
preparedness . Suppose  in a Western  country,  if you ask them  so you are not supposed  to use 
this kind of gear,  it can affect  this or supposin g you cannot  suppose  he is having one steamer  
or fish catching  a vessel.   
So that vessel  all of a sudden  new regulation  come  and they say like no, you are not allowed  
to have  this kind of this particular  type of pump  in your vessel,  you have  to change  the motor , 
you have  to change  the type of oil, you have  to change  the type of gear that is used.  They  can do that because  they are rich, suppose  so in case of rich in Western  countries,  they can do 
that, but all of us are going  to say the same  to sub sub-Saharan African  countries.   
They  cannot just do that though  they understood  the fact though  they understand  that their 
steamer,  their fish catching  vessels  are causing  some  environmental  problem , but they cannot  
add up, they cannot , they just simply  cannot  go ahead  with the alternate  solutio ns, because  
they are not having  enough  money  enough  support  to in a go ahead  and change  with a new 
vessel  that easily .  
So, definitely  and also the preparedness  is also not ready  because  they are very much,  they 
are not susce ptible  to the change  because  they are having  the problem  with the monetary.  
There are other  sociological  point  of view  as well.  So, these  are the reason  this preparedness  
is very important.  And that is normally  shown  that in Western  countries,  they normall y can 
adopt  with the new situat ion very fast, and they do it very frequently,  which  is not as same  in 
all the sub-African  count ries.  
It is not a generic  statement,  I am not giving  a generic  statement,  it is just from  overall  point  
of view,  but definitely  it does,  does have  a lot of exceptions,  it does have  a lot of maybe  some  
in some  scenario  it is like other  way around.  But it is a general  survey  report  by the evidence  
is presented  in front  of the experts . Some of the major  consequences  of this maladaptat ion are 
like increasing  the future vulnerability  and exposure  to the target  region  and the community  
and the sector  to the climate change  effects .  
So, if you do not use proper  adaptation  strategy,  proper  mitigation  strategies  other  than that, 
we are bound  to face the changes  in the nature because  nature  is changing,  everything  is 
changing,  like we are also bound  to evolution , everything  is changing  and we have  to be 
prepared  for this change.   
Some  changes  can be minimized  like this climate  change,  because  this is happening  in a very 
faster way than it is supposed  to do, because  of our foolishness . We can redo the things  we 
can sometimes  we can do some  practices,  which  can have  a rather  forget  about  negative 
rather  positive  effects . So, this way we can reduc e these  effects  and these  conse quences  of 
climate  change  on the aquaculture  practices.   (Refer  Slide  Time : 32:08)  
 
This is the schematic  interpretation  and adaptation  by the Intergovernmental  Panel  on 
Climate  Change , IPCC  a you have  heard  of it. It is an international  body  who and which, 
gave  this model  of vulnerability  to the context  of fisheries  and aquaculture.  See the expos ure 
first, the nature  and the degree  of which  countries  are exposed  to the predicted  climate  change  
and the sensitivity . Degree  of which  economics  and the peopl e are likely  to be affected  by the 
fishery  related  changes.   
This both will have  a potential  impact of, in short,  we call PI, these  impacts  may occur  
without  taking  into account  adaptation.  Adaptive  if we have  the adaptive  capacity,  like 
abilities,  and the resources  to cope  with climate  related  changes  this if we subtract  these  2, we 
will get the vulnerability  situation.  So, this is how it looks  like. It is like G stop all the 
discussion  that we had in the last 2 slides.   (Refer Slide  Time : 33:09 )  
 
Here,  I have  given  some  examples  of actual  incidences  or the potential  risk of maladaptation . 
In the marine  fisheries,  the stocking  hatchery , say what  will happen  in the marine  fishery  
maladaptation.   
Suppose  you are having  a chan ge in the ecosystem  and the diversity  impact  point  of view  if I 
say, if you are talking  a hatchery  breed fish into a disrupted  ecosystem  after an extreme  water  
temperature  event,  which  will have  a subsequent  damage  in the wild population  as well, 
because  you are stocking  it in a disrupt ed situation  and then you will release  them  it will 
definitely  affect  the wild population  in a later stage .  
Diversification  of the fishing  activity  that places  where  which  because  of the it will put a 
pressure  on the new and the more  vulnerable  stocks  like economic  and social  impact , illegal  
fishing  activity  in a noncompliance  with the management  measures  to compensate  with the 
reduced  access  and reduce  catches  in general.  Like if you talk about  the market  and 
infrastructure,  say about  the ecosystem  and the bio diversity  basically . The destruction  in the 
sand dunes,  resulting  from  the building  infras tructure  close  to the water  which  subsequently  
increases  the new buildings  exposure  to the strong surges  and all .  
Economic  and economic  impact  or the social  impact heatwave  of one motor  temperature  
leads  to greater  abundance  of catch  and shift of fin fishing  season and price  collapses  due to 
the lower  demand.  So, your adaptive  strategy  has to be properly  valid.  So, otherwise,  what  is 
happening  this kind of scena rios may we may have  to face because  of this maladaptation  
practices.   (Refer  Slide  Time : 34:52 )  
 
So, anyway  so, in conclusion,  I would  say like, we already  discussed  that, what  is adaptation?  
It is a short -term solution  to climate  change.  And what  are the major  consequences  of 
maladaptation,  which  definitely  it will increase  the future  vulnerability  and exposed  to target  
region , community , and the sector  to the climate  change  effects.   
(Refer  Slide  Time : 35:13 )  
 
And one of the major  takeaway  message  from this lecture  one of the last lecture  material  is 
like, biased  and unrealistic  assessment  of the poten tial risks  associated  with the climate  
change  may deceive  the policymaker,  and also aquaculture  producers  in taking  neces sary 
actions  or precaution.  So, you have  to be very much  cautious  about  this assessment  results  
and maybe  you can do cross  checking  and multiple  cross  checking  by different  experts.   Challenges  that we that we normally  face for successful  adaptation  strate gies are mainly  
failures  to acknowledge  that climate  change  will have  different  effects  on producers  and also 
insufficient  capacity  of producers  in terms  of their preparedness  and because  of the changes  
in their economic  status , because  of changes  in their political  status  and et cetera .  
 
 
(Refer  Slide  Time : 36:02 )  
 
These  are the references  that you can follow  to get more  idea about  to more  information  
about  the change  about  this particular  sector.  I hope  you get to know  about  like you were  
helpful  about  getting  all the with the infor mation  that we have  discussed  in the last 5 lecture  
in this module,  that how climate  change  is happening  and how it is, it is actually  having  this 
drastic  impact  on the aquaculture .  
And this aquaculture , how what  are the strategies  that we can follow  to mitigate  and also to 
go for some  adaptive  strategy , adaptive  technology , adaptive  strategies,  so that we can 
minimize  the harmful  effect  on aquaculture , this climatic  event  and all climatic  anomalous.  
I hope  you get to learn  something  new,  something  really  informative  and you will practice  it 
you will use it in your firm, your design  your future,  like the place where  you will be 
employed  or suppose  you will be sharing  employment  as an entrepreneur.  So, in all the cases  
you will implement  all these  strategies  and all the precautions  that we have  discussed  in last 
few lectures . And it will definitely  help you and it will not only help you but it will help the whole  human  civilization  because  each drop matters.  So, that is it for this lecture  matter . 
Thank  you so much , bye. 