Advance d Aquaculture  Technology  
Professor  Gourav  Dhar  Bhowmick  
Department  of Agriculture  and food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Lecture  61  
Opportunit ies in Aquaculture  Sectors  for the Entrepreneurs  from  the Coastal  Regions  
of India  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 0:26)  
 
Hello  everyone,  welcome  to the 6th lecture  of the module  12, though  this particular  lecture  is 
not actually  connected  to the module  12. It is actually  a standalone  and self-explanatory . In 
this particular  lecture  video,  I want  to discuss  about  the all  opportunities  that is lies with the 
entrepreneurs  from  the coastal  region  of India .  
Whoever  wants  to work  on the aquacultural  sector  and what  are the opportunities  what  are 
the possibilities  of working  in different  variants  of aquaculture  sectors  and I will discuss  
about  some  very specific  ideas,  which  people  really  should  start working  on it at the 
beginning  and this at this particular  date.   
The moment  you are seeing  this video,  because  it has a drastic  opportunity  a lot of 
opportunities  in Indian  context,  I will tell you why I am saying  this opportunity,  these  ideas  
are very much  important  and at this period  of time and specifically  in this in a government  of 
India  is promoting  this blue revolution  and they are promoting  this what  is it called  a the 
different  grants , different  like Pradhan  Mantri  Matsya  Sampada  Yojna  So, there  are a lot of 
things  are coming  up and comment  is also putting  a lot of effort  on it.  So, I can see this aquaculture  sector  will be blooming  in the next 3 to 4 years  like anything.  
And this is your time to what  from  your side and come  up and start working  on this in this 
aquaculture  sector . In my name  is Professor  Gourav Dhar  Bhowmick  I am from  the 
Agriculture  and Food  Indian  department  of IIT Kharagpur .  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 2:05)  
 
To start with if you see this Indian  peninsula  specifically . You see this blue region  with blue 
deep , blue light blue and the super  light blue this all this region  this is the coastal  region  of 
India,  which  has which  extends  up to 7500  kilometer  of land including  the exclusive  
economic  zone  we have  almost  2 million  square  kilometers  of area 2 million  square  
kilometer .  
Can you imagine  the data here it should  be like 2 into 2 into 2.02 million  square  kilometers  
forget  about  the 10 to power  6 it is 2 million  square  kilometer  the actual  data the actual  value.  
So, you can see the amount  of area, amount  of opportunities  that we have  as an aquaculture  
enthusiast  or say like agricultural  farmer  or say aquaculture  expert .  (Refer  Slide  Time : 3:07)   
 
Out of all these  things,  we are hardly  utilizing  any space  just forget  about  the space  that we 
cannot  use see in this particular  picture.  These  green  ones are the places  where  we can work  
on it and we can utilize  this area in the near coastal  region  and even  in the or even  in the high 
seas for different  aquaculture  practices.   
To start with,  if you see a coastal  region  to see where  to start with say like there  is like 
mangrove  area mangrove  area mangrove  forest . That is that acts as a new energy  dissipating  
such a waste  dumping  area that place  should  be as it is you should  not touch  it is very it is 
very much  environmentally  poor situation  if you are working , if you are destroying  this in 
mangrove  areas . 
Then, there  comes  this seagrass  mediated , seagrass  areas  and this seagrass  meadows  if you 
work  that is also working  as reducing  the energy  from  the waves  which  will help to reducing  
the soil erosion  these  things  that also should  be left unattended . Village  area definitely  not 
then there  comes  the seaweed  farming  there  is the opportunity  that I will talk about  more  in 
details  in coming  slides.  The opportunity  in the seaweed  sector,  the production  of seaweed  in 
Indian  context,   
Then, this area word  this the dogs  will normally  present  and then we do not have  to go for 
shipping  go for aquaculture.  Then , there  come  this net this pen farming,  in the pen farming  
we can go for this pen culture  and we can go ahead  with the even  cage culture  as well. There 
we the water  is not as deep  and the current  is still there.   Then  there  comes  a major  fishing  area.  You do not want  to interrupt  and make  any problem  
to the situation  because  aquaculture  is not expected  to be there . Because  it is already  its heigh  
fishing  area. Heigh fish so, there  are a lot of schools  of fishes  are there.  So, people  can go 
there  and you can catch  it for the benefit . 
Then, there  comes  a coral  reef you should  avoid  that. Then, some  buffer  zone  and then you 
can start going  for this heigh sea offshore  cage forming . In this cage forming  you can utilize  
it properly  you have  proper  float and system  proper  guidance  systems . And then, there  comes  
the area which  is too far from  the port which  we do not want  to use. This 1, 2, and 3 this area 
as you can see in this circle  also this 1, 2 and 3 this is also bifurcated  in very fine way. These 
are the places  where  we should  focus  on.  
An Indian  contest,  there  are a lot of opportunities  there  are a lot of a possible  areas  on in this 
green  zone  is still there  in India  and which  is not yet attended  by even  any single  fisherman  
anything  single  fishermen.  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 5:58)  
 
Let me give you some  idea about  the production  rate of some  of the varieties.  So, that you 
will get some  idea about  like what  are the varieties  that you can work  on in Indian  context  
prawns,  which  has which  is it is very fast in the which  can grow  very fast in the culture  
condition . It can reach  a marketable  size in 3 to 4 months.  By intensity  cultural  prawns’  
production  rate can be between  1000  to 1500 kg per hectare  per annum .  Same way Mussels  can be it is it has a very high yield  in the sea farming  condition,  it can go 
in go up to 150 tonnes  per hectare  per year and is brown  mussels  and for green  mussels  it can 
walk  up to 235 tonnes  per hectare  in 5 months . 
Oysters  which  is also another  costly  very profitable  business,  it has a marketable  size within  
10 months  and estimated  production  rate of about  100 tonnes  per hectare  per annum . Eel 
culture,  which  is not yet attended  in India  at all it is doable , it is possible  just you have  to 
meaning  the situation  for its favorable  condition  and then you can culture  it. It can it has a 
production  rate of around  3.8 tonnes  per hectare  per 2 years . 
Seaweed  culture  you can get 4 to 5 kg of the growth  is 4 to 5 kg from  initial  1 kg of seed 
material  within  80 days. Can you imagine  almost  in 80 days you will get 4 to 5 times  higher  
production  rate and this production  this 4 to 5 kg of the seaweed  it has a various  application  
its various  application  whether  from  pharmaceutical,  agriculture,  aquaculture  feed.  
Is it for personal  care product,  where  like you human  consumption,  lot of application  is 
possible  from  the seaweed , but in India,  surprisingly,  only very few people  in a very on 
decentralized  way people  are working  here. It has to be well centralized;  it has to be people  
should  come  forward  and work  on it and do the research  and how we can make  it centralized , 
do it in a centralized  manner.   
(Refer  Slide  Time : 8:01)  
 
So, the problems  that we are facing  right  now and what  we can do to endeavor  this journey  is 
like the first of all to define  the sustainability,  industry  and the operational  challenges  that can 
be addressed  to private  investment.  Second,  you have  to provide  the commercial  and the conservation  context  on the aquaculture  industry  and the supply  chain,  including  all the 
possible  risk opportunities,  challenges  and the segments .  
You have  to offer  this investment  thesis  that identifies  the 6 specific  opportunities  to 
positively  impact  our marine  ecosystem.  That investment  thesis  has to be very precisely  
made;  it is more  like your business  strategy  your profit -making  idea. You have  to identify  the 
key barriers,  outstanding  questions  and opportunities  for further  analysis.  Here  sees this 
capital  intensity  versus  the level  operate.  
Coastal  seaweed  it has a very low level  of risk and also the capital  intensity  of that not that 
much,  but it can range  it has a huge  range,  if you go for offshore  fin fisher  at the research  
wood  aquaculture  system  is fin fish. It has a high level  of risk, but the capital  intensity  also 
very high.  So, this graph  will give you an idea about  the current  scale  of production  all these, 
the size of the circle  is giving  you the idea about  the current  scale  of production.   
And these  excesses  give you an idea about  that capital  intensity  and why access  give you the 
level  of risk involved  with this system.  However,  if you just simply  go for coastal  bivalve  in 
the coastal  seaweed  collection,  seaweed,  farming . Finfish  farming  it will give you a huge  
benefit  in the near future  for sure.  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 9:37)  
 
There  are 6 different  operational  drivers  in the aquaculture  operation . First the feed 
conversion  ratio.  In case of fin fish specifically  you have  to worry  about  the growth  rate, the 
stocking  density,  normal  mortality  rate, animal  health  and welfare  and the product  quality,  
consistency  and the form . These  6 terminologies  just put it in your mind  these  6 terminologies  if you work  on it in a precise  way,  if you do proper  research , you can definitely  
come  up with the operational  idea of the of your farm  and how you will go ahead  how will go 
for the revenue  generation  model  these  things . Think  about  these  6 things  and how it can be 
introduced  to your system  to your farm.  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 10:22)   
 
Several  investment  challenges  are there  which  has to be addressed  and how we can address  it. 
First,  we have  to go for the matching  risk with the return  and investment  hold period . In 
capital  intensive  models,  we can go for financing  the early -stage  research  and development  
programs  like all the suppose  the all the research  and r&d institutions  they are central  r&d 
Institute,  they are in India . 
You go there  finance  them,  and ask them  to like even  in IIT Kharagpur,  also, we have  a 
aquacultural  Engineering  Section . Go here try to get an idea about  what  is going  on here,  how 
to go ahead  with the further  research  on this particular  field.  Financing  the project  
development,  including  addressing  the pilot plant  risk, you have  to identify  those  risks  that is 
there  involved  with it. And think  about  the troubleshooting  phenomena.   
Information  asymmetry  in the knowledge  barriers  in the aquaculture  market  has to be 
removed.  Then you got to know  more  about  the details  when you keep  in touch  with the 
experts.  Then  only you will get to know  more  about  its functionality . Transactional  friction  of 
financing  new types  of assets  that is also important.   (Refer  Slide  Time : 11:29)   
 
And based  on all the discussion  and all, we come  up with 3 different  ideas  that I will be 
sharing  with you that has a very high impact  on the aquaculture  sector  in the very near future.  
First one is online  finfish  is circulating  aquaculture  systems.  I think  already  you got an 
enough  idea about  what  is recirculating  aquaculture  system . We have  our treatment,  we have  
our fish tank,  the fisheries are having  feed, most  of them  are being  uneaten,  this uneaten  fish 
and the fish excreta , it converts  into obnoxious  like this unwanted  pollutant,  this pollutant  are 
treated  in different  sets of treatment  unit then it goes to goes back  to the tank again . 
This way we are having  a we are reducing  the water  footprint;  we are reducing  the land 
footprint  and also, we are utilizing  the water  again  and again  in the same  unit. And what  are 
the helpful  benefit  of it we have  we can control  the whole  environment  for our tank we based  
on it completely  in our hand  how we are treating  the water , wastewater  and converting  it into 
the water  which  is good  enough  for your culture -to-culture  rearing  species . 
You have  a greater  control  over the production  outcome  you can reduce  the mortality  rate 
you can have  a very high production  capacity  per unit area because  in this kind of treatment,  
you can be utilized  for very highly  intensive  aquaculture  units.  So, they are though  the 
production  rate of wastewater  is very high,  but just because  you were  already  introducing  
some  treatment  unit. So, you can afford  that you can afford  to have  more  and more  stocking  
rate, high amount  of stocking  rate in your aquaculture  system . 
You can reduce  the impact  to the wild stock  habitat  the water  pollution  disease  transfers  all 
these  phenomena . However,  everything  is not good  about  it. It has it may come  with the increment  in the energy  usage,  water  usage and the land usage compared  to the normal  CNPs  
like coastal  net pen structures.  However,  people  are working  on it and it is I am saying  you 
again  and again  this is the future  this is the futuristic  model  that people  want  even  already  it is 
there  in the market  people  are working  on it at different  stratum . 
And so I think  this is something  that we should  go ahead  and whenever  we think  about  the 
aquaculture.  This is our research  should  be focused  on our entrepreneurship  tendency  to be 
focused  on these  3 different  ideas  that I will be sharing.  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 13:51)   
 
The first one I have  already  discussed  like about  this only in details  if I talk about  it. In 
general,  this RAS systems  has a legacy  of failed  projects,  high capital  requirement  and lack 
of experienced  operator  and also in unproven  economics  at scale.   
However,  a very new class  of entrepreneurs  are coming  out and they are actually  working  on 
it and they are working  and they have  been  they are attracted  to recycled  aquaculture  systems . 
Because  they know  that there  will be a change  in the regulatory  in system  in policy  and key 
supply  growth,  especially  in the coastal  net pen supply  to see this kind of coastal  net pen 
areas . The supply  growth  and high and growing  market  prices  like for species  like salmon . 
We have  to think  about  some  alternative  system  to the CNPs  this net pen instruction . 
We can improve  the RAS  operational  knowledge  and system  design  and based  on that my 
view  this sector  will remain  risky  in short  term,  but not prohibited  for repetitively  so in all 
cases . And also, knowledgeable  investors  with a very high-risk tolerance  may find 
compelling  opportunities  to be early  mover  in this space  with opportunity  to invest  at a discount  in strong  projects  that have  highly  experienced  management  team . So, that is what  I 
am like requesting  to be the early  mover  you be the change, be the first person  in this kind of 
system  and do something  in a pilot skill bases.   
(Refer  Slide  Time : 15:38)   
 
Second,  it is the offshore  aquaculture  system,  definitely,  it is a future  in Indian  context,  we 
have  a huge  coastal  line, you just go there,  talk to the government  and develop  some  project  
idea and get the money  out of it. And also, good go ahead  with the research  institution,  fund 
them , work  with them , discuss  about  the possible  research  project  and think  about  how we 
can utilize  them .  
See here in the offshore  aquaculture  system  it is in it includes  the reduction  in the effluent  
and the habitat  impact . It improved  the feed conversion  ratio,  it has a potential  for large  scale  
applications,  if you go to the Norway  will be surprised  to see how in a very large  scale,  they 
are working  on this kind of offshore  aquaculture  in this cage and this cage culture  center . 
They have  it like in a huge  scale .  
New species  cultivation  is possible , automation  is completely  possible.  And despite  
availability,  you do not have  to worry  about  sight  and the size of your land area because  it is 
like the whole  vast ocean  is at your service . The proximity  of market  and product  quality  is in 
your hand , the reduced  user conflict  and the unit cost definitely.   (Refer  Slide  Time : 16:46 )  
 
So, in general,  you can have  this advanced  case designs  and systems  which  can have  a proper  
monitoring  and the data gathering  unit. It will be having  underwater  cameras  and underwater  
sensors  which  will keep  on giving  you the real time data from  your processing  unit is from  
your system  office  itself.   
So, from  your office  we can get an idea about  each and every  cage,  how it is working,  what  
are the problems,  what  are the all the sensors  will be there,  which  are very low energy  optic  
in device  in general.  So, you do not have  to worry  about  much  that data will be collected.  
You can collect  the data and that big data if you do analyze,  you can come  up with some  very 
innovative  further  ideas  as well.   
And also this the harvest  is also possible  it is very easy.  And the speed  and supply  in the 
juvenile  fishes  is also very easy from  the hatchery.  So, in general,  this is like an the recurring  
cost is almost  nothing  other  than the transportation  cost you do not have recurring  costs  
because  you are not worried  about  the food much , you are not worried  about.  Because  
everything  is you are actually  kind a having  a culture  you need  in a natural  environment.  So, 
nature  is actually  taking  care of all the things  you do not have  to worry  about  this.  (Refer  Slide  Time : 18:00)   
 
So, this is what  I would  suggest  like though  it comes  with some  disadvantages  very like but I 
would  say like definitely  we should  go ahead  with this and then the government  is also you 
will get a lot of grants , a lot of opportunities  from  that government  if you design  a proper  
pilot plan. Though  it has a high capex  requirement , capex  capital  expenditure  in the initial  
stage  and the complexity  in the deep -water  operation  regulatory  uncertainty  and that is why 
early  movers  must  find it must  be very high-risk tolerance  in order  to make  it prove  as a in a 
commercially  successful  project.   
Promising  a private  investment  opportunity  may exist  for operation  with the phased  
development  plan you can have  a proprietary  technology . You can vertical  integration  or 
other  strategic  advantages  you can incorporate  from  the cage. You can do this long lining  of 
rope culture  of scallops  or like rock culture  of or like we can make  a proper  design  of 
seaweed  culture . So, you can do the multiple  culture  propositions  also can be given  in these  
kinds  of projects  to get more  benefit  out of it. 
In general,  knowledgeable  private  investors  with long investment  horizons  and higher  risk 
threshold  may find this reasonably  priced  opportunity  as early  movers  in a sector  is that 
remain  uncrowded  till now.  So, that is one of the reasons  that I am saying  that this has a very 
high opportunity  in the near future.   (Refer  Slide  Time : 19:37 )  
 
In general,  if you see the structure  of this different  cages  which  is installed  in northern  sea of 
the near to the Norwegian  coastal  region . Say they have  this huge  salmon  industry  and they 
have  they are utilizing  very accelerated  technology  and they have  validated  that offshore  
aquaculture  is possible  and it is very much  clear.  And it is very much  not only possible  it is 
highly  beneficial  and highly  high amount  of return  is possible . Profit is possible  from  this 
kind of system.   
Such  producers  are big by this the backed  by experienced  operators  and who have  dedicated  
substantial  r&d resources  to invest  into new and mega  scale  technologies.  Most  Norwegian  
producers  have  a salmonid  focus  in general . They received  design  input  from  offshore  oil and 
gas sector  and are incentiv ized by a government  program  granting  the free development  
concessions . So, that is the requirement  from  the policymaker’s  point  of view  in Indian  
context,  but it is doable.   (Refer  Slide  Time : 20:43)   
 
Third  idea is like the bivalve  when  the seaweed  production,  it has a lot of benefits  that if you 
go for seaweeds  in the bivalve,  it will clean  your environment,  because  it will consume  the all 
the waste  products  and pollutants  from  your system  from  your water . It will give you a high 
amount  of monetary  return  you do not have  there  is hardly  any recurring  cost because  you do 
not have  to there  is no you do not have  to go ahead  with the culturing  it by yourself  it will be 
just planted  there  give it to continue  in a proper  environment  it will do it will grow  by yours  
by himself  by itself.   
So, you do not have  to go for any further  continuous  recurring in recurring  cost involved  with 
it. It has any if environmental  benefits  and so all the way it is like good  like the bivalve  is in 
general,  they are majorly  produced  in the temperate  geographies  with the production  
dominated  by China.   
And the growth  potential  for developed  in the tropical  waters  are also being  introduced  and 
investigated  recently.  And it is possible  that in the southeastern  Asia also it has a very it is a 
huge  market,  especially  in Indian  context  it has a huge  possibility  for India  to be the lead 
runner  in bivalve  and the for seaweed  production.   (Refer  Slide  Time : 22:04)   
 
The seaweed  farming  which  can have  enough  which  can be used as a use for biopolymer , 
cosmetics  or nutraceuticals , animal  feed and energy  sector  which  may demonstrate  higher  
risk but potentially  high reward  investment.   
However,  it has a very low input  and low fixed  costs,  it can make  the economics  of both 
bivalve  and seaweed  production  much  more  effective  much  more  attractive,  higher  and also 
strong  growth  and the favorable  market  characteristics  definitely  enhance  this particular  in 
the investment  scenario  of this bivalve  industry  specifically  seaweed  industries  to be 
presented,  if you asked  me to.  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 22:44)   
 So, it can be how to say reproduced  with a like I mean  it can be done  with a polyculture  
method  also like you have  your sea culture , you can have  your seaweed  culture,  you can have  
your Pearl culture,  you can have  your bivalve  culture  at the end you can have  the artificial  
coral  reefs  and all.  
So, all these  things  will give you a very sustainable  approach  to reduce  the greenhouse  gases  
from  the atmosphere  to enhance  the environmental  the ecosystem  of the nearby  vicinity  to 
improve,  to give you a helping  economic  return . It will help you grow  something  and give 
you the opportunity  for employability  and on your union  nearby  areas.   
So, in all way,  this is doable  and this is very much  useful  and that is why I am keep  on saying  
it that these  ideas  are actually  very much  useful  and people  should  go and think  about  it and 
work  on it very precisely.  So that like, especially  the you have  to very strengthen  the r&d 
sector.  In this how could  be a the design,  how it had to be designed  properly  scientific  way.  
Then,  only we will get a proper  return.  So, talk to the expert  go ahead  and think  about  the 
possible  project  establishment.  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 23:45)   
 
For the philanthropist , policymakers  and NGOs  like nongovernmental  organizations,  I have  
we have  something  to discuss.  First of all, it is your responsibility  like we have  to design  
properly  in a proper  protective  transparent  and effective  permitting  process  and regulation  to 
promote  this kind of aquaculture  practices  in Indian  context . 
You should  establish  clear  property  rights  and the resource  tenure . You should  promote  the 
development  of enabling  infrastructure  to support  the industry  development  especially  for poor areas , then the rural  areas  where  people  are enthusiastic  about  it, they are interested  in it, 
but they do not have  the proper  infrastructure  to go ahead  and start their business .  
Providing  the program  to promote  a sustainable  innovation  in this aquaculture  sector  different  
ideas  that have  discussed , developing  public  financing  mechanism  so that they will not think  
about  like okay  so the capital  investment  is very high.  So, I cannot  just go ahead  and start 
doing  it.  
Forget  about  it, the system  has changed,  there  are a lot of you can get a lot of grants  from  the 
government,  you can forget  about  grant,  you can get very a lot of different  soft loans  from  
government  and organization  from  the banking  sectors . And they will promote  the people  
who wants  to work  in this kind of sector,  this kind of opportunities,  and they will definitely  
help government  to promote  more  amount  of employability  and definitely  people  will you 
will be supported.  If you have  a good  idea,  definitely  you will be supported  in the long run. 
(Refer  Slide  Time : 25:35)   
 
So, in general,  this is the reference  that you should  follow,  you should  really  go ahead  and 
look this, go ahead  and study  this book.  It is very important  towards  the blue Revolution  by 
Nature  Conservancy  and an Encourage  Capital  Arlington.   
So, in general,  I hope  in this lecture,  I have  given  you the brief  about  all the discussions  that 
we have  that what  are the understanding  that we develop,  and at the end, you get to know  
about  all the opportunities  and possibilities  in this sector  for you to work  on. And so that in 
future,  you will also be an aquaculture  expert,  or an r&d specialist  or say, like entrepreneurs  in this field,  and help not only help yourself  to get some  additional  economic  benefit,  but also 
to help the government  to give the boost  the economy  of your country  as well.   
I hope  this whole  lecture  series  are helpful  to you. And if you have  any issues,  I always  pay 
to discuss  and you can come  and contact  me my mail id and its official  mail id. And 
definitely  I will be very happy  to help you with any issues,  any development  or any plan that 
you want  to. Thank  you so much.  It is, it is a very good  opportunity  for me as well.  I hope  I 
will come  up with some  more  lecture  videos  in coming  sessions  and which  you can find 
helpful  as well.  Thank  you so much.   